---
book: "Technology of Breadmaking"
book_slug: "cauvain-technology-of-breadmaking"
author: "Stanley P. Cauvain & Linda S. Young"
lang: "en"
relevance: "core"
chapter: "Chapter 3: Functional ingredients"
heading: "Chapter 3: Functional ingredients"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 3: Functional ingredients"]
order: 3
source_page: 62
tokens_est: 21920
---

# Chapter 3: Functional ingredients

{{page:62}} TONY WILLIAMS* AND GORDON PULLENt Dough conditioners and their composition The most basic bread dough one might use to produce a baked product would of necessity contain the following minimum ingredients: flour, water, yeast and salt. However, even those most skilled in the art of baking would agree that at the very least it would be difficult to make bread of a high, consistent quality from only these raw materials. The baker has always, where expedient, added small amounts of extra ingredients to enhance dough performance during processing or to improve the quality of finished bread. In the past these materials would usually be foodstuffs in their own right, such as fat, sugars, honey and malt flour. Although the principal benefits were probably considered to be related to the eating properties of the final baked article, it must have become apparent that it was possible to produce modifications to the dough itself during processing which might be equally beneficial in the finished product. Virtually all of the early baking systems had one common factor: between the mixing stage and the final shaping of the dough prior to final proof there was a relatively long resting phase. This was dictated by the need to generate a sufficient rate of gas production by the yeast in the dough to ultimately produce a well-risen loaf of acceptable specific volume. Once compressed yeast became available in the mid-nineteenth century the rate of gas production was no longer the rate-determining factor in bread production. At this point it became clear to all that there were other benefits to be derived from a significant resting period between mixing and final moulding and the concept of a bulk fermentation or floor time was evolved (Chapter 2). This fermentation stage not only enhanced gas production, but it also enhanced gas retention in the dough. Possibly it is for this reason that we have seen the name given to the group of small ingredients, additives and processing aids added to the dough to improve bread quality as, successively, yeast foods, flour improvers and currently as dough conditioners. The term 'dough conditioner' as defined by the author is as follows: any material or combination of materials which are added to yeast-raised doughs to enhance and control gas production or gas retention, or both. The range and level of use of these substances is controlled by legislation in most countries. Recently there have been a significant number of changes in both UK and EC regulations but thankfully the situation has reached a period of relative stability. t Section on Baker's yeast; *all other sections. © Thomson Science 1998 {{page:46}} It will, therefore, be assumed that at least for the foreseeable future the materials described will not disappear from the UK permitted list. The functional components in bread doughs can be divided for convenience into three main groups: ingredients, additives and processing aids. Ingredients may be described as foodstuffs in their own right, such as fats, soya flour, sugar and milk derivatives, although one might not usually consume them directly in the form that they are added to bread dough. It is not the intention in this section of the book to discuss ingredients which characterize particular varieties of bread, rather to examine in some detail a small number of key ingredients which demonstrate specific functional effects in dough processing and final bread quality. The definition of the range of additives which might be used in bread and yeast-raised fine bakers' wares in the UK is now contained within The Miscellaneous Food Additives Regulations 1995, apart from the 'Flour Treatment Agents' which are at present controlled by the 1996 Bread and Flour Regulations. The latter are a small group of non-EC harmonized additives currently awaiting consideration, but full harmonization is expected in the near future. It is hoped that within the next 2 years in the UK and the EC there will be the same single common list of additives for bakery products together with unified levels and conditions of use. In theory a wide range of 'additives' are now permitted for use in bread. In practice only a minority of these additives are of much practical benefit and were, on the whole, already contained in the UK 1984 Bread and Flour Regulations. The contents of the processing aids group are often described as 'additives which need not be declared on product labels!' The most significant materials contained within this arbitrary group are those which may be classified as 'enzymes' of increasing complexity and value. They are found together in this group with the most basic and traditional of bakers' raw materials - yeast foods. Ingredients Fats The soft fats, those with melting ranges similar to those of lard, have been traditional components of white bread in the UK, the USA and many other countries for at least the last 100 years. With animal fats now being out of favour, lard and partially hydrogenated fish oils have largely been replaced by partially hydrogenated vegetable oils with melting characteristics similar to those of lard, or in other cases they have been replaced with liquid vegetable oils, such as rape or soya. These types of fats may be described as 'enriching agents' in fermented products. They change the eating characteristics of bread and fermented goods, giving a shorter, softer bite and at the same time a modest enhancement of the soft-eating shelf life. The effects increase with increasing levels of addition. The {{page:47}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS level of use of such fats varies widely from zero in some breads to about 1 % of flour weight for pan breads, increasing to levels of up to 10% of flour weight or even higher in rich morning goods, such as hot cross buns (a UK spiced and fruited bun traditionally associated with the Easter period). The effects of high melting point fats on dough properties and final bread characteristics are far more significant than those of the softer fats. The importance of high melting point fats was dramatically demonstrated in the research which led to the eventual development of the CBP (Chapter 2) as a commercially viable bread manufacturing process. It was demonstrated that dough produced by the CBP which did not contain at least a prescribed minimum level of 'solid' fat at the end of final proof was highly unstable at this point, and gave bread with a blistered crust and little or no oven spring. The internal crumb structure was dark, open, coarse and the crumb was very firm, in fact all the symptoms of very poor gas retention (Chamberlain et aI., 1965). This effect can be graphically demonstrated by producing bread following the 'classic' CBP method and omitting fat from the recipe and then in successive doughs by adding controlled levels of various fats in a variety of dispersion systems. It was by empirical experimentation such as this in the 1960s that dough conditioner manufacturers devised, developed and refined their fat blends and at the same time established some of the basic rules regarding the nature of what came to be known as the 'fat effect' in CBP doughs. The 'rules' for fat in the CBP and other no-time doughmaking systems can be summarized as follows. • The ideal functional fat is a fully saturated one, with a chain length of C16C18, i.e. tripalmin and tristearin with a melting point in the region of 55-60°C ( 130-140°F). • Short-chain triglycerides, such as Cl2 and C14' are much less efficient on a weight for weight basis and require more rigid control of dough and proof temperatures. • Fully hydrogenated fats based on fish and whale oils, even those with high melting points, are less efficient than fully hydrogenated animal and vegetable oils, presumably because the fatty acid chains are branched rather than straight. • The fully saturated triglycerides must be in a highly dispersed form in the dough. A wide range of ingredients and techniques are capable of successfully dispersing the high melting point fat. • The fat effect is not linear; too little fat produces bread of the same poor quality as bread without fat. There is then a dramatic increase in bread quality over a narrow range of increasing fat, after which there is little more to be gained in bread quality terms by further increases in the level of fat addition. • The level of fat required to satisfy a CBP dough in terms of the fat effect is relatively low and may be in the region of only 0.1-0.2% of flour weight. It does, however, vary from flour to flour in response to factors which remain {{page:48}} unclear and may rise to levels of about 1 % in white breads or 4% in wholemeal (wholewheat) breads (Figure 3.1). It is therefore essential to ensure that, in all circumstances where a high melting point fat is the main lipid source in the dough, a minimum level is added to allow for variations in flour characteristics. The role of high melting point fat in the CBP is that of a key basic component in the dough and, once these finely dispersed fats had been developed for the CBP, their potential in other breadmaking systems was investigated. They have similar benefits for bread quality from other no-time systems, such as those based on spiral mixers (Chapter 2). The role of fat in long fermentation systems is more difficult to demonstrate. Although many traditional recipes contain significant levels of fat, it is possible to produce bread by bulk fermentation or sponge and dough methods with acceptable gas retention properties without any fat in the dough, given sufficient skill and appropriate flour properties, as seen, for example, in the production of 'traditional' baguette in France. However, even in these situations a level of high melting point fat equivalent to that used in the CBP will have a very significant improving effect on bread quality. Summary offat effects. A quite specific type of fat in a finely dispersed form is of benefit in all types of bread dough. It is of particular importance in no-time dough breadmaking systems, such as CBP doughs. It is a highly functional, costEffect of fat Nil Figure 3.1 Effect of fat III wholemeal (wholewheat) bread {{page:49}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS efficient ingredient and can be used as an 'E-number-free' base for compound dough conditioners within the EC for a large number of bread products and manufacturing processes. It is a source of great frustration to bakers and cereal scientists alike that having established the empirical rules by which the function of fat is determined in a wide range of production techniques and processes, the fundamental understanding of the nature of the 'fat effect' in breadmaking still remains unclear. Soya flour Full-fat enzyme-active soya flour as a functional dough ingredient was introduced into the UK in the 1930s. It was considered to have two principal beneficial functions, both being due to a particular enzyme system present in the uncooked bean. This enzyme system, lypoxygenase, catalyses the oxidation of unsaturated fats or lipids by atmospheric oxygen to lipid peroxidases via a number of intermediate oxidation compounds. It is these intermediate compounds that are the functional entities in the dough. The two major functions of enzyme-active soya flour are as a flour bleaching agent and as a mild oxidizing agent. Soya as a flour bleaching agent. The functional effect of soya flour as a bleaching agent is relatively simple and well understood. The intermediate oxidation compounds transfer oxygen from the atmosphere surrounding the dough to the yellow-coloured carotinoid pigment of flour. The oxidized products derived from these pigments are colourless, hence the dough is bleached - in much the same way as benzoyl peroxide functions in dough. In the UK, where benzoyl peroxide is no longer permitted and chlorine dioxide is virtually no longer used, the value of soya flour in breadmaking should not be underestimated. However, even with high levels of soya it is not possible with most dough mixing systems to achieve the same efficiency of bleaching as with benzoyl peroxide or chlorine dioxide. This is due largely to the limited availability of atmospheric oxygen. It is therefore not surprising that spiral-mixed doughs are more readily bleached than CBP doughs mixed under partial vacuum. The effect of soya in a CBP dough mixed under vacuum used on unbleached flour is still significant, possibly because the intense shearing action during the high-speed mixing process (Chapter 4) exposes the dough surfaces repeatedly to the limited amount of available oxygen in the mixer. It has also been demonstrated that by increasing the contact between the dough surface and oxygen the bleaching effect of soya can be greatly enhanced. For example, CBP doughs mixed either in oxygen-enriched atmospheres or under pressure/vacuum systems, where a flow of oxygen is maintained across the surface of the dough during mixing (Chapter 4) will produce dough and {{page:50}} hence bread which is just as white as that produced by chemical bleaching, provided enzyme-active soya is included in the recipe. Gluten oxidation by soya flour. The effect of soya flour as a mild oxidizing agent in dough is by no means as easy to demonstrate as its bleaching effect. The mechanism is complex. There may in fact be more than one route to the beneficial modifications of gluten via soya flour. The 'direct' route has been demonstrated by Frazier et al. (1973). This suggests that the effect of soya is dependent on the presence of polyunsaturated free lipid and that, via a rather complex mechanism, bound lipid is freed from specific sections of the gluten protein thereby allowing this protein to become more hydrophillic and hence to be able to help form the viscoelastic surface of the gas bubbles in the dough. It is also becoming clear that as the number of flour treatment agents becomes ever more restricted, with the single remaining oxidant in Europe being ascorbic acid, the role of soya flour in the efficient use of ascorbic acid is becoming more readily appreciated. In order for ascorbic acid to function in a dough it must first itself be oxidized to dehydroascorbic acid. Where the supply of oxygen is limited, for example in a CBP dough mixed under partial vacuum, or in a conventionally mixed dough where yeast activity begins to restrict the availability of oxygen, soya flour is a valuable adjunct to the oxidation system. This combination has proved to be beneficial in long fermentation processes. Ascorbic acid is a quite rapidly acting oxidizing agent (see below) and although it is difficult to overtreat a CBP dough with ascorbic acid this is not the case with bulk fermentation. Overtreatment results in 'bound', inelastic doughs which are difficult to process and can produce low volume bread with poor oven spring. Too Iowa level of ascorbic acid results in weak doughs with, once again, poor final volume and a coarse open texture. In the past many bakers had become used to flours containing a low level of potassium bromate, a slowacting oxidant which functioned late in the process in the absence of oxygen. A combination of ascorbic acid and soya flour, while no means an ideal replacement, gives at least some tolerance and stability to long-processed doughs. Additives Emulsifiers Diacetylated tartaric acid esters of mono- and diglycerides offatty acids [DATA The legal status of DATA esters in the Ee is that they are esters, E472(e)}. permitted at a QS (quantum satis) level in all types of bread and fine bakers' wares. The term 'DATA ester' is a generic one covering a range of similar materials which vary due to the nature of the fatty acid and the ratio of mono- to {{page:51}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS diglyceride. There are also further significant variations due to the level of esterification by the diacetylated tartaric acid. The physical forms vary from an oily liquid to a fairly free-flowing powder depending on the degree of saturation of the base fat. In many commercial preparations there are at least five major and many more minor components. There are a limited number of types of DATA esters based on low melting point fats or oils which are used as components of paste (fat-like) or fluid (pumpable) dough conditioners. In the UK it is now usual for DATA esters to be based totally on non-animal raw materials, including the glycerol used in the preparation of the monoglyceride prior to the final esterification. By far the widest form of use is in powdered form in powder dough conditioners. The function of DATA esters in yeast-raised wheat flour doughs can be readily demonstrated by practical baking tests and by a number of standard dough rheology methods. The most basic description of the function of DATA esters is that they enhance gas retention when incorporated into almost any yeast-raised wheat flour-based dough. There is a fairly direct relationship between the level of addition and the enhancement of gas retention up to an optimum level, after which there is a plateau followed by a slight reduction of effect at excessive levels of use. The final level of bread quality enhancement is far greater than that of fat. As to the mechanism, one can only select from the literature the one which appears to fit most readily the empirical observations. There is strong evidence that when DATA esters are incorporated into bread doughs they bond rapidly and totally to the hydrated gluten strands. The resultant gluten network is not only stronger but is more extensible and has a more resilient character. This produces a dough which has a gas bubble network with small-sized, strong and extensible gas cell walls. There are three major areas in which this property can be exploited: in white bread, in morning goods (e.g. rolls) and in wholemeal (wholewheat), multi grain and seeded breads. Use of DATA esters in UK white bread. When the flour used in such breads contains an inadequate amount or less than ideal quality of protein, the inclusion of DATA esters assists in stabilizing the dough at the end of normal proof and still provides a dough with reasonable oven spring. The baked bread is of higher specific volume with a more symmetrical appearance. Internally it has a finer gas cell structure with thinner cell walls, and because of this the bread crumb appears whiter, it has a finer, more even texture, feels softer and is more resilient. Levels of addition will be less than 0.3% of the flour weight. Use of DATA esters in high-volume bread and morning goods. The term high (specific) volume breads also covers hard and soft rolls, baps and 'Danish' breads in the UK. The aim in their manufacture is to produce articles with a high specific volume whilst retaining a relatively fine, even structure. These properties are mainly obtained by increasing proof volume to a level which might be considered excessive by normal standards. The proof times for such products {{page:52}} tend to be 50-60 min, but the recipes contain relatively higher yeast levels. Proof is followed by significant but controlled oven spring. This type of product requires a good-quality bread flour as a base for the greater gas retention contributed by the emulsifier. The doughs benefit from the improved proof stability conferred by the emulsifier, especially when the lowdensity doughs are transferred from proof to oven and in the early stages of baking. In the baked product the quality characteristics benefit in a manner similar to those described above for white bread and in addition with the better quality flour which is used (one hopes), the baseline quality is higher and hence the finished article is of enhanced quality. Long proo/processed breads and morning goods. This group covers products ranging from baguettes to Scottish morning rolls and includes overnight proved rolls. For such products DATA esters are required to provide proof stability over periods between 2 and 16 h at low proof temperatures. The overall flour quality varies in this product grouping between low protein flours for baguettes and high protein flours (in some cases with additional gluten) in overnight Scottish morning rolls. All these products require a dough which is stable to extended and often variable proof conditions. For baguettes it must be possible to cut the dough at the end of proof without collapse. In all cases stability is required to ensure a lively movement in the oven to produce an article of high specific volume - baguettes in particular must demonstrate a good 'burst' at the cut (Collins, 1978). DATA esters in wholemeal and seeded breads. A major difficulty in the commercial production of these types of bread is that the particles of bran and flakes of wheat and seeds disrupt the gas cell network in the dough. One approach to overcoming this problem is the addition of extra wheat gluten to the recipe. An alternative is the use of DATA esters or a combination of emulsifier and wheat gluten, which is preferred. The DATA esters confer enhanced gas retention with a finer, more even texture and importantly once again, a thinner gas cell wall structure. The resulting bread not only has increased volume but it also has a much finer, more even crumb structure, a better internal appearance and a softer, less harsh eating characteristic. DATA esters have no effect on the properties of starch-water mixtures and therefore will not directly modify or reduce staling, or staling rates (Chapter 10). They do have a beneficial effect on soft-eating shelf life due to their ability to increase finished product volume and to facilitate a fine, even, thin cell wall structure in a wide range of products. In the UK SSL is permitted for use Sodium stearoyl-2-lactylate (SSL, E482). in bread up to a level of 3 g/kg in bread and 5 g/kg in fine bakers' wares, based on finished product weight. {{page:53}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS This is a less complex material than DATA esters, although the number of lactic acid residues may vary, usually between two and five per molecule. SSL is a white solid with a comparatively high melting point and can be added to doughs in powder form, either alone or as part of a compound dough conditioner. It is miscible with fat and therefore is an ideal component of fat-based concentrates, particularly for semi-rich and rich fine bakers' wares, including rich buns and doughnuts. SSL has some of the properties of DATA esters. It enhances gas retention in the dough but weight for weight it is less efficient in this function. At the same time it does demonstrate genuine soft-eating shelf life extension. It is capable of binding to amylose in a manner similar to that of distilled monoglyceride, which must account for its crumb softening effect. In practice in the UK, SSL is seldom used in the manufacture of standard bread or in lean or crusty recipes. Bakers tend to prefer DATA ester-based dough conditioners for maximum gas retention and add distilled monoglyceride at the desired level when extra softness is needed. However, in semi-rich and rich yeasted goods ranging from soft baps to hot cross buns, and in yeast-raised doughnuts, SSL is often the preferred emulsifier. It gives some of the proof stability of DATA esters, but with a more limited and controlled oven spring resulting in baked (or fried) items with adequate volume (in the case of doughnuts with less blistering in the frier) and a white, fairly dense crumb with a soft, moist-eating mouth feel and an extended soft-eating shelf life. The ideal mode of use for SSL is as part of a compound fat-based dough conditioner together with salt, sugar and flour treatment agents. The range of end products to which it is best suited is that containing both fat and sugar. These two factors combine to make SSL an attractive emulsifier in quite a wide range of baked goods, which is why its use continues to grow in the UK market. In the USA and elsewhere, SSL may be replaced with the calcium form, CSL, and used at levels similar to that for SSL. The overall effects of CSL in breadmaking are similar. Distilled monoglyceride (E471). In the EC this category of emulsifiers is permitted at a QS level in all breads and fine bakers' wares. It is used as a crumb softener and functions by binding to the amylose fraction of the wheat starch at the elevated temperatures typical of baking. In doing so it retards retrogradation of the starch during cooling and subsequent storage, hence it can be claimed that it actually retards staling (Chapter lO). There is no doubt that incorporation of monoglyceride into a recipe does extend the softness of the crumb of yeast-raised products, particularly during the first 3 days after baking. The difference is sufficient to be appreciated by the average customer in a wide range of products. For this reason they may be used cost effectively as partial fat replacers. The distilled monoglycerides function extremely well in this role but there is a temptation, particularly in semi-rich and rich fermented goods, totally to replace the fat by what is considered to be an {{page:54}} appropriate level of monoglyceride. Such actions can result in products in which the crumb is indeed very soft immediately after baking, but over the next 24 h becomes weak, dry and crumbly. In products other than standard UK white bread it is not advisable to replace more than 50% of the fat in the original recipe. The most functional fatty acid base for crumb softening is stearic acid which for baking ingredients has a relatively high melting point, 55-65°C (130-150°F), and therefore to be functional it must be made water dispersible in some way and must be in the correct crystalline state. For these reasons, distilled monoglycerides are offered to bakers in two distinct forms: as hydrates in water and emulsions, and as water-dispersible powders. Hydrates are oil in water emulsions produced by blending the melted emulsifier and hot water together with a low level of a stabilizer and then cooling, with stirring under carefully controlled conditions to form a stable emulsion. If formed correctly, this emulsion will remain in the correct crystal phase permanently. The emulsifier level in such hydrates is in the region of 20-40% by weight. It is also possible to combine high melting point fats into such products to give them a dual function. There are no set rules for levels of addition of hydrates; however, the following can act as a basic guide: • in standard UK 800 g white bread, up to 1 % of hydrate by weight of flour should be sufficient to significantly extend shelf life; • in morning goods containing fat, add 50% of the original level of fat in combination with 25% of the original level of fat hydrate; • if a water-dispersible powder is used then it should be added in the same way, but assume that one part of powder is roughly equivalent to four parts of hydrate. On its own, distilled monoglyceride has only one function in yeast-raised doughs; it softens the crumb of the product post-baking and assists in the retention of the extra softness for up to about 3 days. It does not enhance gas retention and therefore does not improve proof stability, product volume, crumb colour or crumb texture. Those hydrates which exhibit some of these other properties do so only because of the high melting point fat which is contained within the emulsion. Lecithins (E322). The legal status within the EC for lecithins is that they are permitted QS in all types of bread and fine bakers' wares. The term lecithin covers a group of complex phospholipids found naturally in a wide range of animals and plants. The most usual source of lecithin used in the baking industry is soya. It is extracted as a viscous liquid which is approximately 65% phospholipid and 35% soya oil. The liquid is blended with gypsum or wheat flour to produce a free-flowing powder which can then form the base of a composite dough conditioner. Lecithin is not widely used in the UK. It is, however, very popular in France {{page:55}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS as the principal lipid source in baguettes and other crusty breads. The reasons for its popularity are in part historical and in part technical. It was, and still is, the only legal source of lipid permitted for a traditional French baguette (as defined within the EC). It is capable of enhancing gas retention in a dough to some degree, although in this respect it is far less efficient than DATA esters or SSL. At the same time it has a very different effect on crust character. DATA esters in particular produce crusty baked goods with a thin, 'egg-shell' crust which can have an 'exhibition' appearance but which tends to become leathery during storage. Lecithins give a thicker denser crust which may not look as attractive but tends to retain its crispness qualities for longer. In the UK lecithin may only have limited use, but in crusty goods, either when used alone or in conjunction with DATA esters, it is of potential benefit and has possibly been neglected for too long, being described as 'continental' and 'old fashioned'. Flour treatment agents In the UK this group has been considerably reduced with the removal of potassium bromate in 1990 and azodicarbonarnide in 1995. As a group it is the only class of additives which is not yet harmonized by regulations within the EC. Harmonization may well mean that there will be more changes in the near future and, as such, might well result in even further reductions in the number of flour treatment agents permitted in UK fermented products. The two significant additives, or flour treatment agents, likely to be retained in this group which are relevant to yeast-raised products are the oxidizing agent ascorbic acid and the reducing agent L-cysteine. Ascorbic acid (vitamin C, E300). In practice this will soon be the sole remaining chemical oxidant available to the baking industry throughout the Ee. At present the level of use is limited in the UK to 200 ppm by weight of flour, although it is probable that once EC harmonization of regulations is achieved this will be increased to QS as it is in other foodstuffs. To understand the beneficial effects of oxidants in the breadmaking process it is necessary to describe briefly the basic structure of a wheat flour-based dough. The key factor is the wheat protein. When mixed with water wheat protein has a property unlike almost any other plant protein to form a viscoelastic sheet. The hydrated wheat starch granules are embedded in this structure which forms at the surface of minute gas bubbles produced in the dough from occluded air present on the flour particles prior to mixing. The two major components of wheat protein are usually described as glutenin and gliadin. Glutenin consists of high molecular weight proteins in which individual polypeptide chains are crosslinked by the disulphide bonds of the amino acid cysteine. Gliadines are composed of lower molecular weight proteins in which the cysteine crosslinks are intra- rather than intermolecular (Figure 3.2). {{page:56}} Once hydrated both classes of protein are to a high degree in the form of either alpha-helix or random helix. In addition to the crosslinked cysteine present in wheat protein there are a number of cysteine amino acids present in the reduced form as shown in Figure 3.3. The ratio of -S-H groups to -S-S- bonds is approximately 1 :20. The reactions which occur between -S-S- and -S-H links during mixing and bulk fermentation or mechanical dough development are varied and complex, and discussed in greater detail in Chapter 11. At this stage we need consider only the most basic change which occurs in the dough, which is a reduction in the stresses experienced in the gluten network and is commonly referred to as the disulphide-sulphydryl interchange. This exchange is illustrated in Figure 3.3. It occurs to some degree during conventional (low-speed) mixing, but at much more rapid rate during mechanical dough development or spiral mixing. Introducing an oxidizing agent into the system complicates matters further. It is now possible to oxidize the -S-H group, either to form new crosslinks between protein chains or to oxidize the -S-H group to S03H, which is no longer capable of undergoing disulphide-sulphydryl interchange. The possible effects of ascorbic acid in mechanically developed doughs can be listed as follows. • Oxidation of water-soluble -S-H groups to remove them from the system. This would benefit the dough structure by preventing them from preferentially reacting with the -S-H groups of the glutenin molecules exposed during the development period. Inter Cy I s I s D- Amino Acid Cy - Cysteine I D- Cy--O-O-O-O-O Intra -D-D-D-Cy I s I s I -D-D-D-Cy Figure 3.2 Representation of cysteine crosslinks in gluten. {{page:57}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS GJ 9 9 @ -0-0- Cy -0-0- -0-0- Cy-O-OFigure 3.3 Representation of disuJphide-suJphydryJ interchange. • Causing an -S-S- bond to be formed between a water-soluble protein -S-H group and a glutenin -S-H group. This might well weaken the dough structure. • Causing an -S-S- bond to be formed between two of the glutenin -SH groups exposed during the development period. This would increase the elasticity of the dough structure. • The direct oxidation of an -S-H group in a glutenin molecule to a stable form which is then unable to take part in further interchange reactions. Thus the role of the oxidant is thought to be first to remove the water-soluble protein -S-H groups from the system. These groups will be the most readily reactable ones in the system, so that this must be the major reaction. The result is a shift of the balance of the reactions of glutenin molecules towards the formation of interglutenin -S-S- bonds rather than glutenin-soluble protein -s-s- bonds, thus producing a more elastic structure. It will also increase the degree of reaction of the 'masked' glutenin -S-H groups exposed during development, both to increase the number of -S-S- linkages and also to stabilize some as a nonreactive form. The overall effect is to produce a stable, stronger, more elastic gluten network capable of expanding without rupture, during the rapid growth of the gas cells in the early part of the baking process. Bulk fermentation doughs are not subjected to the same conditions of stress as mechanically developed doughs since -S-H groups are not exposed to oxidation to the same degree. They are far less likely to react with small protein subunits to weaken the structure and so require far lower levels of oxidant to obtain optimum development. The optimum level of oxidant is therefore to a large extent determined by the dough processing system. The use of ascorbic acid presents a further complication. Chemically it is a reducing agent and can only function as an oxidizing agent in a dough after it has been itself oxidized to dehydroascorbic acid, and to function efficiently requires the availability of atmospheric oxygen (Collins, 1994). The breadmaking system which has the greatest need for oxidation, the CBP, has traditionally been carried out using the application of partial vacuum during {{page:58}} mixing to ensure a fine and uniform cell structure in some final products (Chapter 2). Coupled with this is the fact that in any yeasted dough the available oxygen is rapidly taken up by the yeast (Chamberlain, 1979) and it is easy to deduce that ascorbic acid is not the ideal choice of single, all-purpose oxidant for the UK and other baking industries using mechanical dough development processes like the CBP. To summarize: • Ascorbic acid is the only chemical oxidizing agent currently available in the European baking industry. This situation is very unlikely to change. • It requires atmosphere oxygen and ascorbic acid esterase to function. • It is a large molecule and may not be able to oxidize a number of -S-H groups which are 'protected' by the gluten molecule. • In CBP and spiral systems a high level of use is required (between 100 and 200 ppm by weight of flour). • There is some evidence that, at levels higher than the currently permitted UK maximum of 200 ppm, it may be beneficial, for example in frozen doughs (Collins and Haley, 1992). • In CBP doughs, particularly those mixed under partial vacuum, it very quickly becomes unable to access the atmospheric oxygen it requires to function effectively because of the competition from the yeast. • In bulk fermentation systems it can only function efficiently in the mixer; later in the process it lacks the atmospheric oxygen to convert it to the dehydro- form. • It is a relatively expensive material. Against any of its shortcomings ascorbic acid does have a number of significant advantages. • It is vitamin C and therefore it is almost inconceivable that it would under any circumstances be removed from the list of permitted additives for bread. • It is to be expected that in the near future its use as a flour treatment agent will be harmonized throughout the EC at QS level. • The use of high levels of ascorbic acid in no-time doughs does not lead to the problems associated with overtreatment, such as those which occur with either azodicarbonamide or potassium bromate. • The efficiency of ascorbic acid is greatly enhanced by the use of spiral mixers or by the new CBP-type systems, such as oxygen enrichment or pressure/vacuum mixers in which a supply of oxygen to the dough surface is maintained for part of the mixing cycle (Chapter 4). It is possible to enhance dough characteristics using emulsifiers and enzymes to complement the action of ascorbic acid, as typically occurs with composite improvers. As discussed briefly above, it is also possible to modify the mixing and dough development system to optimize the functions of ascorbic acid. In these circumstances the production of bread and other yeast-raised goods of high {{page:59}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS quality with ascorbic acid as the sole chemical oxidizing agent is possible. It may, however, require rebalancing of formulations or modification of production techniques, and more care and attention to detail on the part of bakers themselves to obtain optimum results. This is an amino acid which due to its -S-H group can act L-cysteine (920). as a reducing agent directly on the disulphide bonds in the gluten structure of the dough. It is commonly used in the hydrochloride form. It was first used in the UK and Eire as a component of the Activated Dough Development (ADD) process as a mixed oxidant in conjunction with ascorbic acid and potassium bromate (Chapter 2). The ADD process allowed bakers to obtain some of the processing advantages of no-time doughs with low-speed mixers. L-cysteine relaxes the gluten structure during the mixing process, enhancing dough development. ADD was largely abandoned due to the loss of potassium bromate from the list of permitted additives in the UK and the progressive replacement of low-speed mixers by spiral mixer types. L-cysteine does still have a role in the UK baking industry. It may be useful at a low level in single-piece 800 g CBP white bread to help to reduce (but not eliminate) streaks and swirls in the bread crumb cell structure generated at the moulding stage. In pinned-out morning goods, such as Scottish morning rolls and soft baps manufactured from CBP or spiral-mixed doughs using plants with little or no first proof, it can greatly ease stresses within the dough reducing misshapes, cores, streaks and swirls in the internal crumb structure. It can also reduce the incidence of holes under the top crust in such products. It is beneficial in increasing flow in CBP-produced goods, such as hamburger buns which are processed in indented pans, often using short first proof systems usually designed for sponge and dough processes (Chapter 9). It can also be helpful in the manufacture of pizza bases, which must return to their original shape after sheeting or pressing (often such doughs contain a high level of rework which increases the resistance of dough to deformation). Reducing agents are sometimes used to modify the behaviour of flours when the protein content is high or where the rheology of the doughs is unsuitable for the breadmaking process being used. In North America the treatment of strong flours which are said to be 'bucky' with a reducing agent can be relatively common. In such cases the addition of a reducing agent may be used to improve moulding behaviour. The list of permitted oxidizing agents which Oxidizing agents in the USA. may be used in the USA is somewhat longer than that within the EC. At the time of writing the use of potassium bromate is still permitted, although many bakers have stopped using it. Unlike the situation in Europe, North American bakers do not commonly use ascorbic acid, and salts of iodine, e.g. potassium iodate, and azodicarbonamide are still in use. The latter are not limited to any {{page:60}} Table 3.1 Preservatives and their use Maximum permitted level Product category (ppm of finished product) } Acetic acid (E260) All bread and fine bakers' wares Potassium acetate (E261) QS Sodium diacetate (E262) } Acetic acid (E260) Prepacked sliced and rye breads Potassium acetate (E261) QS Sodium diacetate (E262) } Sorbic acid (E200) Potassium sorbate (E202) 2000 Calcium sorb ate (E203) Propionic add (E2S0) } Sodium propionate (E281) 3000 Calcium propionate (E282) Potassium propionate (E283) } Acetic acid (E260) Part-baked, prepacked and Potassium acetate (E261) QS energy -reduced Sodium diacetate (E262) breads Propionic add (E2S0) } Sodium propionate (E281) 2000 Calcium propionate (E282) Potassium propionate (E283) } Prepacked fine Acetic acid (E260) bakers' wares Potassium acetate (E261) QS with aw > 0.65 Sodium diacetate (E262) } Sorbic acid (E200) Potassium sorbate (E202) 2000 Calcium sorbate (E203) Propionic acid (E2S0) } Sodium propionate (E281) 3000 Calcium propionate (E282) Potassium propionate (E283) } Acetic acid (E260) Prepacked rolls buns and pitta Potassium acetate (E261) QS Sodium diacetate (E262) Propionic acid (E2S0) } Sodium propionate (E281) 2000 Calcium propionate (E282) Potassium propionate (E283) {{page:61}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS great extent by available oxygen for their action and are suited to the sponge and dough processes in common use in North America (Chapter 2). Preservatives The preservatives permitted for use in bread and fine bakers' wares in the UK are contained in The Miscellaneous Food Additives Regulations 1995. They are summarized in Table 3.1. The permitted preservatives are intended to inhibit the growth of moulds and thermophilic bacteria (Chapter 10). Of the three groups of preservatives listed in Table 3.1, sorbic acid and its salts are of least value in bread and yeast-raised goods, because of their detrimental effects on dough characteristics rather than their efficiency in the inhibition of microbial growth. The levels of use required to give any significant increase in shelf life result in doughs which are sticky and can be very difficult to process. The resultant baked product has a poor volume and a coarse, open cell structure. If the customer is prepared to accept the presence of a preservative in the product, the propionates provide the most effective protection against mould growth. The usual choice from this group is calcium propionate. The limits of use in the defined classes of baked goods are lower than those previously permitted in the UK regulations. They are, however, less restricting than they might at first appear. The levels refer to the free acid and they are based on the total weight of the baked product. There is a very significant loss in propionic acid level during baking. In practice the usual maximum levels of calcium propionate presently used in the UK, i.e. 3000 ppm by weight of flour, should give adequate protection and remain within the law for all classes of baked products. At this level the mould-free shelf life can be extended by 2-3 days. It is usual when adding calcium propionate to a dough to include it as part of a composite dough conditioner. This may be a little more expensive but it offers the following advantages. • In the pure form, calcium propionate is not a pleasant material to handle. As part of a composite improver it is less likely to irritate the eyes and lungs. • It can be incorporated into bulk handling systems for dough conditioners, so that the need for bakery staff to come into direct contact with it is virtually eliminated. • It minimizes the risk of errors in weighing, together with the possibility that it might be omitted totally in some doughs or added at above the permitted levels in others. Many producers do not wish to see preservatives included on the labels of their baked goods and the only material they will accept is acetic acid. It is usually added in the form of a 12.5% solution at levels of about 0.6-0.9% based on flour weight. It is much less efficient in inhibiting mould growth than {{page:62}} calcium propionate, although it does offer some limited protection. It has more benefit in inhibiting the growth of thermophilic bacteria provided that it is added at such a level that it lowers the pH of the dough to 5.2. Where significant protection against microbiological spoilage is required it is best to use calcium propionate at a level of at least 2000 ppm by weight of flour and to use it all year round, since this offers protection against both moulds and thermophilic bacteria. It should be noted that preservatives can only inhibit microbial spoilage; they do not destroy microorganisms. The essential basis for baked goods with an adequate shelf life is a well-designed, clean, well-run bakery with a thorough, appropriate hygiene system correctly implemented and closely monitored. Processing aids Enzymes Enzymes are biological catalysts. They greatly accelerate the rates of reaction in natural plant and animal systems. In the past the use of enzymes in bread and flour has been strictly regulated in the UK to a limited positive list in successive Bread and Flour Regulations. Until recently the only two classes of permitted enzymes were alpha-amylases and proteinases. In 1995, after a long campaign by the whole of the baking industry, hemicellulases were added to that list. In 1996, much to their own surprise, the Bakery and Allied Traders Association succeeded in persuading the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in the UK to deregulate totally the use of enzymes in bread and flour in the UK. However, this act of deregulation was accompanied by the strong suggestion that any use of new enzymes in bread or flour should be preceded by an examination of each preparation by the Committee On Toxicity (COT) in the UK regarding all aspects pertaining to food safety. Alpha-amylases The alpha-amylases are a range of enzymes which catalyse the same basic reaction, namely the breaking of hydrated starch molecules, both amylose and amylopectin unbranched and branched long-chain maltose polymers, into short-chain unbranched molecules known as dextrins. In combination with beta-amylase, an enzyme which attacks the ends of the amylose and amylopectin chains breaking off individual maltose sugar molecules, and given sufficient time and the right conditions, they are capable of converting starch almost totally to maltose (Figure 3.4). Each time a starch chain is broken by alpha-amylase, two sites are created at which the beta-amylase can function. It is therefore the level of alpha-amylase which is the rate-determining enzyme in the system. Most wheat flours contain an adequate level of beta-amylase, but usually only a low level of natural (cereal) alpha-amylase and so it has become common {{page:63}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS Amylopectin Amylose Alpha amylase Beta amylase Beta amylase I 0-0 Maltose I Figure 3.4 Representation of the actions of alpha- and beta-amylases on starch. practice to make adjustments to the amylase levels through additions of suitable materials. The effect of the addition of alpha-amylase to a dough is dependent on at least three factors: the level of addition, the dough temperature and the heat stability profile of the particular type of alpha-amylase (Miller et al., 1953). Generalized heat and activity profiles are given for a range of types of alphaamylases in Figure 3.5. In the milling of wheat to flour for bulk-fermented dough, it was usual for the miller to add to the flour a low level of fungal alpha-amylase. This addition, in the region of 5-15 Farrand units (FU) (Farrand, 1964), was to ensure the presence of an adequate amount of sugar for the yeast during final proof and in the early stages of baking. It was necessary to control both the damaged starch (Chapter 12) and the fungal alpha-amylase level to prevent excessive hydrolysis of starch, which leads to doughs becoming progressively softer and stickier throughout fermentation and subsequent processing. In the UK, fungal alpha-amylase was preferred to cereal alpha-amylase derived from malted wheat or barley because of its lower heat inactivation temperature. This reduced the risk of the formation of an excessive level of dextrins in the bread during the later stages of the baking process. If there is an excess of dextrin formation, the baked loaf will have a dark crust and the internal cut surface will feel sticky to the touch. Problems even arise at relatively low levels of dextrin formation in sliced bread. The dextrins rapidly coat the slicer blades and it becomes progressively more difficult to achieve a clean cut. Eventually the bread becomes tom rather than cut and begins to compress and collapse at the in-feed to the slicer (Chamberlain et al., 1977). This difference is of much greater significance in notime doughs, whether in spiral or high-speed mixers. In many production units using the CBP, particularly when using flours which are lower in protein quantity and quality, it has been found beneficial to incorporate into the dough conditioner high levels of fungal alpha-amylase. Often these additions are in the region of 100-150 FU (Cauvain et ai., 1985). In these circumstances the enzyme is not incorporated into the dough to provide a {{page:64}} 100-r-o::::-~ __ I<'"" GMO amylase Activity (%) 50 Cereal amylase _ Bacterial amylase o 60 90 70 Temperature (0C) Figure 3.5 Generalized temperature-activity curves for alpha-amylases from different sources. source of sugar for the yeast, but for its effect on loaf volume. The effect on dough characteristics and finished bread quality can be dramatic. Oven spring and hence final loaf volume can be considerably enhanced. The cut surface is whiter with a finer cell structure and a softer, more tender crumb. It has been suggested that the increased oven spring is due to the action of fungal alpha-amylase on starch in the loaf in the temperature range of 55-60°C (130-140°F). At this point the hydrated starch begins to gelatinize. It is therefore very vulnerable to attack by alpha-amylase. If there is the correct balance in the system it is possible to delay the gelling of the starch within the baking loaf long enough for it to continue to grow in the oven for a little longer than would otherwise be possible. Observations on doughs containing high levels of alphaamylase compared to a control of the same composition but containing little or no amylase confirm that the loaf containing the higher amylase levels does in fact continue to expand further into the baking process (Cauvain and Chamberlain, 1988). The reason why cereal alpha-amylase represents a far greater risk than fungal alpha-amylase becomes apparent if one compares the heat inactivation curves of the two enzymes (Figure 3.5). Bearing in mind the additional factors that both yeast activity and beta-amylase activity cease below 55°C, it is clear that in a baking loaf the cereal amylase will continue to produce dextrins during baking for far longer than fungal alpha-amylase, so that the final level of dextrins in the loaf will be higher. The major risk associated with the use of fungal amylase is at the dough processing stage, and if care is not taken to determine the optimum level of addition, or if uncontrolled delays occur during processing, sticky unprocessable doughs can result. {{page:65}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS Cereal alpha-amylase. The only sources of cereal alpha-amylase available to bakers are diastatic flours produced from malted barley and wheat. These flours contain complex enzyme cocktails which can be in some situations of great benefit. The two major components are alpha- and beta-amylases. In most but not all wheat flours there is an abundant supply of beta-amylase. Thus diastatic malt flour is regarded primarily as a source of cereal alphaamylase. As such, cereal alpha-amylase is not as widely used in the UK as fungal alpha-amylase. Its comparatively high heat inactivation temperature would make its use at levels of activity similar to those at which fungal alpha-amylase is currently used in the UK impractical for sliced breads. The level of dextrins produced within the bread would almost inevitably lead to slicing difficulties of the type discussed above. In some circumstances diastatic malt flour does offer the baker specific advantages and opportunities, for example in the manufacture of un sliced crusty goods where a high specific volume with lively movement in the oven is desirable. The crust should be well coloured and crisp but not leathery. This is primarily achieved by the correct baking technique but can be facilitated by the addition of the correct level of diastatic malt flour. In Germany any compound dough conditioner designed for the production of small crusty rolls will contain diastatic malt flour rather than fungal alpha-amylase. Bacterial alpha-amylase. Alpha-amylases produced from bacteria are remarkable for their heat stability. They will in fact retain some of their activity throughout the baking process and can therefore continue to produce dextrins throughout the entire baking cycle and even during cooling. The result of adding even very low levels of bacterial alpha-amylase to doughs for the production of any sliced breads can be both spectacular and disastrous. The bread crumb becomes so sticky it may even become impossible to slice the loaf. The only use for bacterial alpha-amylase in yeast-raised products is in the production of malt breads, where the incorporation of bacterial alpha-amylase into the recipe can produce such a loaf with a moist, sticky crumb which lasts for weeks rather than days. Alpha-amylase which is a product of modern biotechnology. The ability of alpha-amylases to retard staling, i.e. the delaying of starch retrogradation has been recognized for some time. The practical difficulty has always been that any alpha-amylases which demonstrated this effect were relatively heat stable, i.e. they were of cereal or bacterial origin. Such amylases produced at the same time both extended softness and excessive stickiness in the baked product due to the formation of high levels of dextrins from both the amylose and amylopectin fractions of the starch in the latter stages of baking. If it were possible to fractionate alpha-amylases from existing cereal or bacterial sources to obtain a specific temperature stability profile and a {{page:66}} controlled range of hydrolysis products, it might be possible to modify the amylopectin in the baked loaf to inhibit or delay starch retrogradation without the risk of causing excessive stickiness in the baked loaf. Enzyme manufacturers have in fact been able to achieve this goal by producing alpha-amylase from a bacteria into which a gene for maltogenic amylase from a different bacteria has been introduced. The resulting alphaamylase preparations do not contain enzymes which are themselves novel, nor do they contain genetically modified material. They do, however, have specific temperature stability profiles and produce a controlled range of breakdown products from amylopectins, such that when used at low levels they are able to enhance soft-eating shelf life without creating gumminess. Because of their low level of use they have no detrimental effects on the dough during processing. In the UK, alpha-amylases have been specifically included in the National Bread and Flour Regulations since 1985. It is therefore considered that these new products are alpha-amylases and do not contain genetically modified material, and as such they should be permitted for use in bread (subject to general food safety regulations). It is also considered that since they are processing aids, they do not require to be labelled. In practice the great advantage of these enzymes compared to traditional crumb-softening agents, such as distilled monoglycerides, is that they extend the soft-eating shelf life for longer, i.e. they show a great advantage over the period of 3-6 days post-baking compared with monoglycerides, and are at least as good in the first 3 days. A significant further advantage is that this softness is not accompanied by either weakening or drying out of the crumb. Hemicellulases The hemicellulases were added to the list of permitted enzymes in the UK prior to full deregulation, and therefore a significant number of commercial preparations have already been approved by the COT in the UK and are widely used in all sectors of the industry. They can be quite complex enzyme systems, usually being derived from either fungal sources or from genetically modified organisms (GMOs). The function in their parent organisms is to break down plant cell wall material ultimately into its component sugars, mainly xylose and arabinose, to provide an energy source. The endosperm of wheat from which white flour is produced consists mainly of starch, protein and lipid (see also Chapter 11). It is subdivided in the grain into small cells, the cell wall material being composed of a complex mixture of long-chain molecules based primarily on the sugar xylose. There are a number of arabinose side chains, and in some cases the chains may be crosslinked via these arabinose sugars. In a limited number of molecules there is a direct bond between some of the material and protein via ferulic acid. This whole group of related materials is described as wheat pentosans and they {{page:67}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS are present in white flour at a level of about 2% of the total flour weight. They have historically been divided into two groups, the soluble and the insoluble pentosans, which are present in roughly equal weights. The significance of the pentosans in dough structure becomes apparent if one examines the distribution of water in a bread dough. Although representing only 2% of the total flour by weight, pentosans are associated with approximately 23% of the total dough water, i.e. they bind roughly ten times their own weight in water! Not surprisingly the pentosans have intrigued bakers and cereal scientists for decades. There are many reports of attempts to evaluate their function, which can be briefly summarized as follows: apparently, soluble pentosans enhance baking performance whilst insoluble pentosans detract from it. The commercially available enzymes described as hemicellulases when added to dough have the effect of modifying wheat pentosans. It can be clearly demonstrated that a number of these enzyme systems (used at an appropriate level) have a considerable beneficial effect on the characteristics of a wide range of baked goods. At the dough stage their use results in a dough with enhanced handling properties, and which is more extensible, without loss in strength or increase in stickiness. It may even result in a modest increase in water absorption. The dough has significantly better proof tolerance, and enhanced baking stability and oven spring. The baked product has greater volume together with a finer cell structure (Cauvain, 1985). The fine cell structure in tum yields better crumb colour, improved softness and resilience. Bearing in mind that pentosans are a component of all wheat flours, it is not surprising that hemicellulases have been found to be beneficial across a wide spectrum of flour types and qualities and throughout the whole range of production systems. The theories regarding the mode of action of hemicellulase in dough, as usual, lag behind the practical application. There is what is best described as a 'lively debate' as to its principal function. A number of suggestions are outlined below: • by bringing about a controlled increase in the solubility of the pentosans, the rate of diffusion of carbon dioxide through the dough water is slowed down and gas retention is enhanced; • by controlled breakdown of the most complex pentosans, their ability to interfere with the formation of the gluten network of the dough is reduced; • bonds may be broken between pentosans and protein, both increasing the available protein and reducing potential disruption to the protein network; • The release of water into the dough system during baking lowers its viscosity and permits greater and later expansion in a manner similar to that observed for alpha-amylase (S.P. Cauvain, personal communication). Proteinases This group of enzymes directly attacks protein chains. In doing so they increasingly and irreversibly weaken the gluten structure. They are therefore {{page:68}} regarded with understandable suspicion by the UK baking industry, although they are more regularly used in North America to counteract the effects of 'bucky' flours. 'Over-strong' gluten is not a common problem in most European bakeries. To achieve any discernible effect in the processing of notime doughs, they need to be added at high levels. On occasions they can be of use in the production of pinned-out morning goods if used in conjunction with L-cysteine. Novel enzyme systems The deregulation of enzymes in the UK is so recent that the industry, which is still coming to terms with other recent changes in legislation, has not yet grasped its full significance. Without doubt the next generation of dough conditioners will incorporate novel enzyme systems. Whether these will be based on lipases, glucose oxidases, peroxidases, combinations of all three or an entirely different enzyme system, time alone will tell. Summary of small ingredients The materials which have been discussed above constitute some of the principal functional 'small ingredients' currently found in bread and yeast-raised fine bakers' wares. When contemplating their use and potential benefits, it would be wise to bear in mind the following: • their principal functions are to enhance and control the quality of baked goods; • each one has a specific function and an optimum level of use in a particular system; • they can only be used to best effect in carefully balanced combinations, so that each component complements the function of the others; • they are able to compensate for minor variations and deficiencies in flour quality, and in plant and processing conditions; • they are very definitely not intended to rescue the baker from incorrect or widely varying flour quality, nor from inappropriate or badly maintained plant; • above all, they are no substitute for an adequate level of understanding of the science and craft of baking, conscientiously applied by the baker using the products. It may appear that the range and permitted levels of such ingredients available to the baker are constantly being reduced. Sometimes it seems that the major customers, the consumer groups and regulatory bodies are in some dark conspiracy to reduce the formulation of bread back to the basics of flour, water, salt and yeast with which baking first began. An unbiased examination of the {{page:69}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS UK Miscellaneous Food Additives Regulations 1995 reveals a range and level of additives sufficient to produce the whole range of UK breads and fine bakers' wares of consistent high quality. In addition it is not likely that this list will be reduced in the foreseeable future. A further bonus is that a number of substances have been added to the list, for example gums and modified celluloses. When these changes are linked to the huge potential offered by the deregulation of enzymes, we may well be on the brink of fulfilling the old wish 'May you live in interesting times' . Bakers' yeast Where does yeast come from? The use of yeast in breadmaking has at least 6000 years of history since fermentation of bread dough is thought to have started with the ancient Egyptians. At that time dough fermentation would probably have taken place by using a mixture of natural yeast and lactic acid bacteria. Bakers would save a portion of dough to seed subsequent doughs, and this method continued into the nineteenth century. In the Middle Ages, European bakers would produce a barm, a more liquid fermentation, which was often started with brewers' yeast from hops. Louis Pasteur's research aided the understanding and development of yeast cultures. Commercial bakers' yeast started with the Vienna Process in the midnineteenth century. The basis of this process was to introduce air and a small amount of steam into the fermentation. The development of the Vienna Process increased the yield and enabled quality to be controlled. At this time yeast was grown on grain. During 1915 (war-time in Europe) there was a shortage of grain and molasses started to be used commercially to grow yeast. Principal forms of yeast Throughout the world today, bakers' yeast is produced in various forms which meet specific requirements of climate, technology, product, methodology, transportation and storage. Bakers' yeast comes in a number of different forms including compressed, granular, cream, dried pellet, instant, encapsulated and frozen. The variations are related to the physical form of the yeast, with the main differences being in the yeast moisture content. Various cultures are developed which depend on the properties required for the yeast's intended use; this will be discussed later. Compressed yeast. This form is normally supplied in blocks and wrapped in waxed paper. A dry matter content of 28-30% is the standard for this product. In the UK, blocks are of 1 kg (2.2 lb); a 0.5 kg block is common in many {{page:70}} other parts of the world. There is a small domestic market for 42 g (1.5 oz) blocks. Granular yeast. This usually consists of small granules, has a dry matter content of 30-33%, and is supplied in laminated paper or plastic bags. Because it has a far greater surface area than compressed yeast, it is more vulnerable to temperature increases which impair the quality of the yeast. Granular yeast has in the main been superseded by cream yeast but has been used in brew processes and automated feed systems in breadmaking. Cream yeast. Cream yeast is a pumpable form of yeast which has the consistency of cream. Cream yeast generally replaces compressed at a rate of 1.5:1, although some cream yeast is marketed at l.7:1 replacement ratio, an important point for quality addition and costing. Also, when using cream yeast in the bakery, the extra water content should be compensated for in recipes. Dried pellet yeast. This was an early form of dried yeast, produced as small beige-coloured pellets with a very low moisture content. Its advantage over compressed yeast was that, when packed (and sometimes gas flushed), it could be transported and stored more easily, at ambient temperatures, and had a longer shelf life. For use in the bakery, dried yeast needs to be reconstituted in five times its own weight of warm water. A variety of pack sizes are produced from 1 tonne packs for others to repack, through 12.5 kg (27.5 lb) packs to 20 g (0.7 oz) tins, plastic containers and sachets. Dried pellet yeast has mainly been superseded by Instant yeast for bakery and domestic uses. Instant yeast. This form was developed in the 1960s; it has a very low moisture content and a fine particle size. The main advantage of using instant rather than dried yeast is that moisture from the flour does not affect yeast activity. Instant yeast is popular on the islands around the UK and for premixes for bread and pizzas. The main use is for baking in parts of the world where compressed yeast is not available or where instant yeast is considered to be more convenient. Encapsulated yeast. This is a specialist yeast produced for premixes where its use does not necessitate prior drying of the flour. Due to its high cost, encapsulated yeast is little used today. Frozen yeast. This can be compressed yeast which has been frozen under special conditions; it needs to be defrosted slowly for use. There is also a specialist yeast produced for frozen dough which has a lower moisture content than compressed but higher than instant yeast, with the appearance of instant yeast and which, although frozen, is free flowing. {{page:71}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS Discussion. The above descriptions illustrate the various physical forms and appearances of yeast. Drying, freezing and encapsulation are all methods of yeast preservation. Different cultures and growth methods have also been developed by yeast manufacturers to produce yeasts for the different baking methods and fermented products. The cultures and growth methods will affect a number of yeast performance factors, such as activity, acid tolerance, osmotolerance, temperature stability, response to mould inhibitors and shelf life. Some of these properties will be discussed later when considering the uses of yeast in baking. Other yeasts Yeasts such as brewers' and distillers' yeasts may be used for bread type production but, as they are not specifically developed for that purpose, they are unsuitable because they have low activity and would not have the particular tolerances built into specialist bread yeasts. The following are examples of other yeast products. • Pizza yeasts have low activity. They are an instant type of product with added benefits for pizza production, such as shrinkage reduction. • Deactivated yeasts are another instant form of yeast product with additional properties such as characteristics to replace L-cysteine to assist in the relaxation of doughs. • Inactive yeasts are produced to give flavour and as a flavour carrier, in products such as potato crisps. • Yeast extracts are used in food spreads and soup flavourings. Biology o/yeast cells Yeast is a living organism. It is found naturally, living around us, in the air, on the ground and on the fruits and leaves of many plants. A common example of a yeast is the bloom we can observe on grapes. There are about 500 known yeast species. The scientific name for bakers' yeast is Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which means 'a mould which ferments the sugar in cereal (saccharo-mucus cerevisiae) to produce alcohol and carbon dioxide'. The actions of yeast may be shown in a simplified form as follows: simple sugar => ethyl alcohol + carbon dioxide => 2C2HsOH + 2C02 C6H120 6 Examining a yeast cell under a microscope will give a greater understanding of the composition and nature of yeast. The method for viewing a sample of yeast under a microscope is to disperse a small amount of yeast in water, causing the water to be slightly clouded, and then drop a spot of the liquor onto a glass slide. {{page:72}} MITOCHONDRIA MEMBRANE CELL WALL PHOSPHATE GRANULES 1/1000mm Figure 3.6 The yeast cell. The drop is then covered and viewed with a 650 x magnification. The individual cells will take the general form illustrated in Figure 3.6. If individual yeast cells were placed side by side it would take approximately 1200 cells to measure lcm in length. Yeast is a unicellular organism (single cell) and 1 g of yeast contains around 15 x 109 cells. Individual cells will be seen to be round to oval in shape. Inside each cell are the following. • A liquid solution of protoplasm, protein, fat and mineral matter. • One or more dark patches called vacuoles. • A darker spot which is the nucleus. This is where the cell's genetic information is stored as DNA which controls all the operations of the cell. A yeast cell has 6000 different yeast genes. Yeast is made up of chromosomes, like any living thing; there are 16 different chromosomes in yeast compared with 23 in humans. The double cell wall may have bud scars which are caused by budding, i.e. the cell reproducing itself. There can be up to ten such scars, which would cover the cell totally, after which the cell would expire. The osmotic properties of a yeast cell are due to selective permeability of the cell wall with regard to solutions. This selectivity plays an important role in controlling the movement of nutrients into a cell. Nutrients are present in a {{page:73}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS Figure 3.7 Buddmg m yeast cells medium in the form of ions, sugars and amino acids. The permeability of the cell wall also permits the release of alcohol and carbon dioxide from the cell during fermentation. The yeast growth process is created by encouraging reproduction, by providing the correct conditions of warm water (30°C, 86°F) and nutrients (sugar). As was described earlier, yeast is asexual and reproduces by budding, the general form of which is shown in Figure 3.7. A parent cell grows a protuberance, this swells as the bud forms, a neck develops between the parent cell and the bud, and they separate. The process starts again and, in ideal conditions, a cell can reproduce itself in 20 min, so that numbers increase from one to two, then to four, to eight, to 16, and so on. If the numbers are plotted on a graph, the line would take an exponential form. Yeast can also reproduce by sporulation. This process occurs when cells are deprived of food. Each cell will produce up to four spores which, when the cell wall shrivels away, are released into the atmosphere. Yeast cells can survive in the form of spores for extremely long periods of time and, when later brought into contact with the right conditions the yeast will return to active life. Yeast microbiologists are able to use the state of yeast sporulation to interbreed yeasts in order to produce hybrid yeast with specific qualities. Today, genetic engineering of yeast cells in order to confer special properties is possible but, until it is more generally accepted, yeast producers consider that it would be unwise to risk a potentially devastating drop in bread sales. Overview of commercial yeast production The typical raw materials used for the commercial production of yeast growth are: • molasses caneibeet; • ammonium hydroxide; • magnesium sulphate; • diammonium phosphate; • air; • sulphuric acid/sodium carbonate (processing aids for pH control). For yeast growth by reproduction, a carbohydrate food source is required. This could be grain, but today molasses is a cheaper form of sugar and therefore is preferred. The vitamins and minerals in molasses support yeast growth. {{page:74}} Yeast culture First seed Commercial propagator Propagator propagator x 6 Figure 3.8 Commercial propagatIOn of yeast Molasses from beet, cane or a mixture of both can be used. As molasses consists of approximately 50% sugar, twice the weight of molasses is required to produce compressed yeast. Nitrogen is a major growth nutrient, which is added in the form of ammonia. Oxygen is provided in the form of filtered air. A starter culture is grown under sterile conditions in a laboratory. A perfect, healthy cell is selected under a microscope, the culture IS grown III a test tube with the required nutrients and is then transferred to flasks and larger vessels until it has grown to the required quantity for a commercial starter. The yeast culture is then constantly fed over a period of time and, as it grows and expands, it passes through approximately six stages of commercial propagators, as illustrated in Figure 3.8. At this stage in the production cycle the yeast cells are suspended in a large amount of water. The concentrated yeast is extracted from the water by a centrifuging process in large separators, which provides yeast in a cream form and an effluent waste. The yeast cream is cooled and can be transported in that form without further processing to large bakeries for use. The water content of the yeast cream is further reduced by filtering, passing through a filter press or rotary vacuum filtration unit. The next process is to prepare the yeast for its final form: • extruded for compressed yeast; • minced for granular yeast; • dried, either by drum drier, spray drier or fluidized bed drier for pellet or Instant yeast; • freezing of compressed or semi-dried yeast. The yeast is packed and then transported by road, rail or ship, depending on the destination, and in frozen, chilled or ambient forms, depending on the product. {{page:75}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS Bakzng with yeast Throughout the world there are many dIfferent types of bread, each of wmch reqmres dIfferent characteristics of yeast. Examples mclude products made m hot and hUIrud chmates, those requmng long product shelf hves where addItions of mould mhlbltors at slgruficant levels may be used; for hIgh-sugar sweetbreads; and for those for slow or rapId fermentatIOn processes Pre 1960's yeast at varying levels 18~~--~--------~~~--~--. 16 14 c o 12 t! -6 10 ~ 8 ~ 6 o o o o o o o o (") ... ..... a> a> ,.... In (") ~ ~ ~ Time In minutes _Yeaslat1 .7% -..-Yeaslat2% ~Yeaslat1% Post 1960's yeast at varying levels 20 c o ; g 15 'til e Q, 10 II) III C) 5 o o o o o ,... o o 0 0 III ..... III ..... 0) (t) 0) Time in minutes -+-Yeastat 1% _Yeast at 1.7% -.-Yeastat2% Figure 3.9 Gas productIOn III the CBP {{page:76}} Chorleywood Bread Process (CBP). As a result of the introduction of the CBP in the early 1960s, a new type of yeast became necessary. The yeast commonly used in the industry had too slow a reaction for the new, faster process and had an inappropriate fermentation and gassing curve. Specifically, the yeast was lacking in gas production at the critical stages of proof and during the early stages of baking. Increasing the quantity used of the existing yeast type could not rectify the situation. The two graphs shown in Figure 3.9 illustrate the problems incurred with the existing yeast in the CBP and the effects of the new culture which was produced specifically to overcome these problems. It will be seen from the results given in Figure 3.9 that when using the pre1960s yeast in the CBP (Figure 3.9a), gas production dropped at the time that the bread was about to enter the oven, resulting in little or no oven spring. In the graph for the post-1960s yeasts (Figure 3.9b), there is no drop in gas production. Yeast for the CBP is used at a rate of 2% of flour weight, which is more than the percentage of yeast used in long-fermentation processes. Acidity or alkalinity. The most favoured pH range for yeast is 4.S-6.0. Bread doughs are generally in the region of S.S, so in normal breadmaking the effect of pH is not a particular consideration. Storage stability (compressed yeast). Dough proof time is dramatically affected by the age and the temperature at which the yeast has been stored. The percentage difference in proof time of yeast stored at 4°C (39°F), 10°C (SOOP) and 1S0C (S9°F) for both 7 days and 14 days is compared in Pigure 3.10, which shows how proof time increases with the temperature at which the yeast has been stored. Effects of mould and rope inhibitors. Mould inhibitors, such as propionic acid and calcium propionate, have a retarding effect on yeast fermentation. Depending on the type of bread product, the required shelf life and climatic Yeast storage stability [high activity compressed yeast] .: ~ I n:I::I 50 !- u 0 c 0 ""; is. c;.::: 0 7 days 14 days Figure 3.10 Yeast storage stability. {{page:77}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS conditions, the addition of inhibitors will vary. It will have the effect of slowing the yeast activity and extending the proof time. It is normal for bakers to add extra yeast to the mix when using mould inhibitors. The quantity will depend on which yeast is used, since acid resistance is built into yeasts which are normally sold for use in recipes and products which contain mould inhibitors. To prevent rope occurring in bread, acetic acid or spirit vinegar (12.5%) may be added. This will also affect yeast fermentation but to a lesser degree than mould inhibitors. Since the introduction of the 'E' -number classification in Europe, there has been a preference by bakers to use spirit vinegar, a natural product, to avoid having an E-number and giving a 'clean label' to the bread product. A comparison of the effects of vinegar, calcium propionate and propionic acid on yeast activity (proof time) is shown in Figure 3.11. Effect of spices and bun spice. Spices will affect the activity of yeast, the quantity of spice being determined by the required flavour of the finished product. It is normal for a higher yeast level to be used in such products, and bun spice is often added with fruit as late as possible in the process in order to reduce its effect on yeast activity. Yeast infrozen dough. As a generalization, a slower yeast is more robust and a faster yeast is more fragile, although yeast producers can take steps to overcome specific situations, such as by selecting appropriate cultures and changing growth patterns. In Figure 3.12 the effects of different yeasts and their performance after Mould and Rope inhibitors 15.5 16 .... 14 0 e 12 c.. 10 c Q) Q) E 8 1/1 ._ cu .. e 6 4 u .5 2 ~ 0 0 0.1% 1.5% 1% propionic calcium vinegar acid [100%] propionate [12.5%] Figure 3.11 Effect of mould and rope inhibitors on yeast activity. {{page:78}} Yeast characteristics in frozen dough .. ., 120 -= c e 80 .. ! ~ .E 60 ~ 40 ~ 20 II. Figure 3.12 Yeast characteristics in frozen dough. being frozen and stored for up to 6 months at -18°C (O°F) are compared. The two yeasts shown are very similar at between 1 and 2 months storage. If the yeast was only frozen for up to 1 month, then the faster yeast would be better, whereas when frozen for between 3 and 6 months the slower yeast appears to be better. There is a specialist frozen yeast which is produced, a free-flowing frozen yeast (F3). Freezing of this yeast takes place as its final stage of production, and it remains frozen during delivery and until it is used. This is considered to be the best yeast for producing frozen doughs as it has built-in tolerance of freezing. Salt. Salt can be used to aid or control fermentation. There are a number of breadmaking methods, such as delayed salt (Chapter 2), which allow maximum fermentation before the salt is added to check the fermentation rate. Salt is also required to assist the flavour of bread; with no salt, bread is insipid (Chapter 1). The normal rate of salt addition is about 2% of flour weight, but when sugar is included, and especially high sugar, this level can be reduced to 1%. Sugar. In the UK, little or no sugar is used in basic breads, although specialist breads and other fermented goods, such as morning goods, may have up to 15% sugar. Elsewhere, such as in African and Asian countries, it is not uncommon for as much as 30% sugar to be used. Special yeasts with high sugar tolerance, for high-sugar doughs, are produced for these countries. Effect of salt and sugar on yeast activity. Both salt (sodium chloride) and sugar affect the activity of yeast. The extent to which changes in osmotic pressure caused by increasing salt level affects the activity of yeast is shown in Figure 3.13. Weight for weight, salt has a far more dramatic effect on yeast than sugar, as can be seen by comparing the results illustrated in Figure 3.13 with {{page:79}} FUNCTIONAL INGREDIENTS Effect of Salt on yeast activity 60,--------------------- .5 40 ~1l :::I :;:l .. ... C 020 o E Q. 0 o LO 0 LO N N c:i Salt % d flour weigl! Figure 3.13 Effect of salt on yeast actlVlty Effect of Sugar on yeast activity 7.5 10.0 12.5 5.0 2.5 0.0 Sugar % of flour _ight Figure 3.14 Effect of sugar on yeast actIVity those given in Figure 3.14. The quantities of salt and sugar change bread baking for reasons of flavour, texture and product shelf life, and so the formulation of fermented products can have a significant influence on yeast activity. Conclusion Throughout history, yeast cultures have been developed to meet market needs. The market for bakers' yeast has increased due to higher demand for fermented goods and also due to the development of automated breadmaking processes where higher yeast levels are used. The requirements for yeast are diverse, covering local to worldwide use, from home baking once a week, through hand and craft bakeries to fully automated bakeries using as much as 25 tonnes of yeast per week. The finished products vary enormously according to local culture, the availability of grain and costs. Yeasts for these different needs may be single strain, hybrid or with mixed strains and propagation {{page:80}} profiles. Their physical condition may be liquid, dried or compressed, with storage at ambient to frozen temperatures, either sealed airtight or inexpensively wrapped. Ultimately it is necessary for the baker to choose the most suitable yeast for the process, climate and recipe, according to commercial availability. References The Bread and Flour RegulatIOns. UK SIl304 (1984) HMSO. London The Bread and Flour RegulatIOns, UK SI3202 (1996) HMSO, London Cauvam, S P (1985) Effects of some enzymes on loaf volume m the CBP FMBRA Bulletin, No I, February, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK, pp 11-17 Cauvam, S P and Chamberlam, N (1988) The bread Improvmg effect of fungal alpha-amylase Journal of Cereal SCIence, 8, Nov, 239-48 Cauvam, S P, DaVies, J A D and Fearn, T (1985) Flour charactenstIcs and fungal alpha-amylase m the Chorleywood Bread Process FMBRA Report No 121, March, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK Chamberlam, N (1979) Gases - the neglected mgredlent, m Proceedings of the 49th Conference of the BritIsh SOCIety of Baking, pp 12-17 Chamberlam, N, Collms, T H and Elton, G A H (1965) The Chorleywood Bread Process Improvmg effects of fat Cereal SCIence Today, 10(8) Chamberlam, N , Collms, T H and McDermott, E E (1977) The Chorleywood Bread Prow,s the effects of alpha-amylase actlVlty on commefCIal bread FMBRA Report No 73, June, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK Collms, T H (1978) The French baguette and pam Panslen FMBRA Bulletin, Apnl, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, pp 107-16 Collms, T H (1994) MlXlng, mouldmg and processmg of bread doughs m the UK, m Breeding to Bakmg, Proceedmgs of an InteruatlOnal Conference at FMBRA, Chorleywood, 15-16 June, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, pp 77-83 Collms, T H and Haley, S (1992) Frozen bread doughs effect of ascorbic aCid additIOn and dough nuxmg temperature on loaf properties FMBRA DIgest 114, February, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, pp 21-3 Farrand, E A (1964) Flour properties m relatIOn to modem breadmakmg processes m the Umted Kmgdom, with special reference to alpha-amylase and damaged starch Cereal ChemIstry, 41, March, 98-111 FraZier, P J , Lelgh-Dugmore, FA, Damels, N W R et al (1973) The effect of hpoxygenase actIOn on the mechamcal development of wheat flour doughs Journal of Sczence, Food and Agriculture, 24(4), 421-36 Miller, B S , Johnson, J A and Palmer, D L (1953) A companson of cereal, fungal and bactenal alpha-amylase as supplements III breadmakmg Food Technology, 7, 38 The Miscellaneous Food Additive RegulatIOns, UK SI3187 (1995) HMSO, London {{page:98}}
