---
book: "Technology of Breadmaking"
book_slug: "cauvain-technology-of-breadmaking"
author: "Stanley P. Cauvain & Linda S. Young"
lang: "en"
relevance: "core"
chapter: "Chapter 5: Proving, baking and cooling"
heading: "Chapter 5: Proving, baking and cooling"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 5: Proving, baking and cooling"]
order: 5
source_page: 137
tokens_est: 13900
---

# Chapter 5: Proving, baking and cooling

{{page:137}} CHRIS WIGGINS Introduction Proving, baking and cooling are the stages of breadmaking that convert a fermenting dough into a stable product ready for consumption. There is evidence that leavened products were made in Egypt around 2000 Be and unleavened bread has been made since prehistoric times. The three operations, proving, baking and cooling have been essentially the same ever since, relying on the properties of the raw materials and the way they behave when heated to produce a staple product that is both nutritious and good to eat. How the process was discovered we shall never know in detail but the huge variety of leavened bread products eaten across the world today all rely on the same basic principles. Proving, or proofing, allows time under favourable conditions for the yeast and enzymes in the flour to be active. Then, during baking, the rate of heat transfer is increased so that the outside of the loaf dries to a crust and inside, the starch swells and the protein coagulates. Cooling reverses the direction of heat transfer and aims to produce loaves that are ready for wrapping, often with slicing as an intermediate operation. A typical timescale, with process conditions and their effect on loaf core temperature, is shown in Figure 5.l. Like many other processes in the food and drink industries, the details of the physical mechanisms and chemical changes occurring inside the dough during its various processing stages are extremely complex and only comparatively recently has it been possible to argue that breadmaking has become more of a science than an art. In the last 40 years, as more sophisticated measurement and microscopic techniques have been developed, understanding of the changes that occur during baking has advanced dramatically, increasing many-fold the resources available to the baker, particularly in ingredients, where flours, enzymes and special yeasts can be obtained, all tailored for specific purposes (Chapter 3). The ready availability of significant computing power means that dynamic models can now be constructed for the heat and mass transfer during baking, and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) can be used to visualize the air flows and heat transfer both in the processing chamber and also around and within the product. A plot of air velocity vectors in an oven chamber with a blowing nozzle, strip burners and an extraction point is shown in Figure 5.2. © Thomson Science 1998 {{page:121}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING 250 Dry bulb 200 [) ::""150 E! :::J '§ OJ a. ~ 100 Proving f50 l>-============:::;~wet bulb O.~ ______________________ -r ______________________ -. ____ _ o 100 200 Time (mins) Figure 5.1 Proving, baking and cooling. A better understanding of these mechanisms has not led to any breakthroughs in the design of the equipment to prove, bake and cool bread. The basic designs are well established and have developed in an evolutionary fashion, mainly to support increases in output and improvements in consistency and reliability. Every country has traditional breads, for some of which quite special baking conditions are required, but as a popular product spreads around the world, there is a tendency for its characteristics to change slightly to conform to the requirements of high-volume production on modern equipment. This tendency towards standardization makes it legitimate for this chapter to assume that the bread is being baked in tins or pans, as the processes used are substantially the same as for other speciality breads that may be proved and baked on flat plates. Figure 5.3 illustrates a variety of popular bread products and the choice of the range of products to be made and their characteristics will determine how the plant is configured and adjusted. Some important considerations are as follows. • What are the required crust and crumb properties? • Is the surface to be glossy? • Does the loaf have to be sliced? • What must the final moisture content be to meet the yield target or legislative requirements? {{page:122}} Velocity vectors around nozzle Figure 5.2 CFD representatIOn of a bakIng chamber All these properties can be manipulated by changing the heat transfer programme, although they are not, of course, independent of the recipe formulation and mixing regime. This chapter does not contain any formulae, but attempts to explain qualitatively the mechanisms at work, in the belief that an understanding of what is happening during the later stages of the breadmaking process will be of more use in achieving the required product characteristics and in overcoming quality problems than will a list of specific instructions or pages of photographs of defective loaves. The properties of air and water mixtures are fundamental to the understanding of proving, baking and cooling, so a short refresher course on psychrometry has been included after this introduction. Production bakers will also be interested in production costs and in maintaining the performance of their heat transfer equipment and some routine procedures are suggested to help them to monitor the state of the plant. Trends in equipment design are also indicated in each section and the promise of emerging technologies is discussed. {{page:123}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING Figure 5.3 Bread vanety Psychrometry Definitions Dry bulb temperature IS the actual temperature of a gas. Dew point temperature is the temperature of an air and water vapour mixture below which condensation of vapour will begin. Saturation is the condition of the mixture at the dewpoint temperature. Relative humidity is the ratio of the partial pressure of the water vapour in a mixture to the saturation pressure at the same temperature. It is a concept that IS very useful for air conditioning work, but for process work at hIgher temperatures, dew point is often more useful when trying to visualize whether the dough surface will be experiencing condensation or evaporation. Wet bulb temperature is the temperature indicated by a thermometer in an airstream when the bulb is kept wet. It is not an absolute physical property like dry bulb and dew pomt temperatures, but It IS easIer to measure and can be used to estimate the relative humidity, from tables. Specific humidity is the mass of water per unit mass of dry air in a mixture of air and water vapour. A psychrometric chart (see example in Figure 5.4) is used to compute the condition of air and water vapour mixtures during heat and mass transfer processes, of WhICh proving, bakmg and cooling are typical examples. {{page:124}} 1.6 ?> -6 1.4 E " .<= " 1.2 '5 Ql C. rJl 1.0 0.8 0.6 Wet bulb = B00C 0.4 Wet bulb = 70°C 0.2 Wet bulb = BO°C 0.0 100 ISO 0 50 200 250 300 Temperature (OC) a ~ft-------1 = .044 = 036 ?> = .028 -6 E " = 024 .<= " '5 Ql c. = .020 rJl = 016 ..... 001)8 = .012 '. till)t "', w&t "',?Vh = 008 = .004 40 50 20 30 b Dry bulb temperature (0C) Figure 5.4 Psychrometric chart. The proving process Proving, or proofing, is the name given to the dough resting period, after the moulded pieces have been put into tins, during which fermentation continues in a controlled atmosphere. Fermentation is a blanket description for a series of complex, interlinked reactions, which are dealt with in more detail in other {{page:125}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING chapters. To understand proving, a simpler model is sufficient. Starch is converted into sugars by enzyme action. The sugars feed the yeast and the breakdown products are carbon dioxide and alcohol. As carbon dioxide is produced it is retained in the tiny cells formed in the protein matrix during mixing, causing the cells to grow and the dough to expand. The number of cells cannot be increased during proving, but the structure can be coarsened, and if the dough is overproved then the cell walls will start to collapse. Other products of yeast activity, mainly acids, are also formed during proving and they can contribute significantly to flavour development. The dough is confined by the walls of the tin and this helps to determine the shape and orientation of the cells in the final product. For example, a dough piece that has been divided into four or six pieces and laid to fill the bottom of the tin will finish with uniform, vertically elongated cells, whereas a single piece, too short to fill the tin, can expand in length as well as height and the final loaf crumb will not look as white or bright as its multi-piece competitor. Figure 5.5 illustrates diagrammatically how the cells grow and elongate as the dough piece volume / / / Tin Doughpiece as panned After proving Figure 5.5 Effect of dough piece and tin shape on cell structure. {{page:126}} increases and the outside skin of the piece slides up the oiled surface of the tin. In reality the cells in the dough will not be round to start with and they will have been aligned by whatever moulding has taken place into a starting pattern, which will then be subjected to expansion. Providing it can be done without compromising product quality, there is an obvious requirement to minimize proof time - a longer time represents a bigger proving chamber, which means higher capital cost and more space, more work in progress and longer product changeover times. This means optimizing the conditions for fermentation so that the required biochemical changes will happen as quickly as possible. When the dough enters the prover, it will be at a temperature of 28-30°C (82-86°P), which is the maximum at which the moulding equipment will work efficiently - any hotter and the dough will be so sticky that problems of product transfer will outweigh the advantage of any possible reductions in proof time. The dough expands by a factor of three or four during proving, to almost its final volume, and it is important that the skin remains flexible so that it does not tear as it expands. A flexible skin is one which has not been allowed to dry out, so that controlled humidity is essential. A humid atmosphere is also required to minimize weight loss during proving. Yeast is at its most active at 35-40°C (95-104 °P), so to minimize proof time, heat transfer to the dough is necessary, to raise its temperature by 10-15°C (18-27°P). Part of the heat is supplied as moisture condenses on the loaf surface and on the baking tin, and gives up its latent heat. This quickly establishes a temperature gradient, which is the driving force for heat transfer, by conduction, to the centre of the dough piece. At this stage of the process the dough is dense and is a relatively good conductor, so the temperature of the dough piece will stabilize quite quickly. A prover air inlet temperature of 42°C (l08°P), with a dew point of 35°C (95°P), is typical. This warms the dough gently and after about 20 min the dough will be at a uniform temperature of about 35°C, the peak gassing temperature. The temperature of the dough stabilizes at the dew point temperature, further heat transfer evaporates moisture from the surface instead of raising the temperature. The evaporated moisture raises the specific humidity as the heat transfer reduces the dry bulb temperature, so that at the outlet the circulating air may be almost saturated. Typical air conditions and dough temperatures are shown in Pigure 5.6. The dough piece gains weight at the start of proving and then loses it again - the nett loss on a dough piece weighing 880 g (31 oz) will be typically about 3 g. Practical proving The prover air conditioning system has to be able to handle the full range of operational conditions. At one extreme will be the start-up on a cold morning, when the bakery and all the mixing and forming equipment are cold and, even if the prover inlet conditions are right, the average condition will be colder than {{page:127}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING , Dry bulb 10. 20 40 10 30 Proof time (mins) Figure 5.6 Changes during proving. standard because the heat load on the system is greater. It is normal practice under these conditions not only to raise the prover temperature for start-up, but also to increase the yeast level in the dough. This is a typical example of the pragmatic measures that are taken in production to maintain acceptable quality when a process solution, in this case providing a temperature-controlled doughforming area, is available but could not be economically justified. At the other extreme is the hottest, most humid day of summer, when flour temperatures are high and tins returning to the moulder are hot. The process is always the most demanding when the external circumstances make it most difficult for the prover air conditioning to respond. However, it will help to reduce yeast level and run the prover at a higher speed than normal. Prover checklist It is important that bakers understand how the air is supposed to circulate in their provers and how the air conditioning systems cope under different ambient situations. Then they are in a position to take regular readings and detect any deterioration in air quality before process performance starts to get worse. {{page:128}} The minimum checklist should include air temperatures and humidities at entry and exit of the prover, as well as a velocity measurement to check that airflow is as it should be. To check uniformity it is best to compare proof height and centre temperature for loaves that have taken different paths through the prover. Many large plants now convey the products through the prover and oven in single file, often in a figure of eight, and this concept largely removes the possibility of differences in air flow, and therefore heat transfer, from one tin strap to the next, although badly designed tin straps can still cause loaf-to-Ioaf differences within a strap. Finally, for each of their products bakers should record how the product looks, in terms of temperature and height in the tin, at convenient points in the prover. This knowledge will often allow them to take corrective action when something changes in the mixing room and they may be able to save loaves that would otherwise be out of specification. Modern prover design Aiiflow The air condition that the dough pieces encounter when they enter the prover must encourage condensation as an essential part of the process, but excessive condensation can lead to unsightly streaks or spots on the crust. Also, saturation of the air should be avoided since condensation is then likely to occur on the structural surfaces of the prover, which may lead to hygiene problems, or could cause corrosion in older equipment which is not satisfactorily protected. These potential problems are avoided by minimizing the temperature drop between the air inlet and return, with the air approaching saturation as it leaves the prover. The temperature step is proportional to the heat transferred so a smaller step means that more air must be circulated in order to supply the required heat transfer to the dough. Higher air flows give the potential added advantage of more even side-to-side conditions and less danger of stagnation of air. Ambient conditions There are other practical issues of prover design which need to be considered, particularly where ambient conditions can be hot and humid and air of the right quality is not available to be mixed or conditioned to produce air for the prover at the specified temperature and humidity. In the UK, air at 42°C (108°F) and 80% relative humidity can always be provided by taking fresh air, passing it through heating coils and then adding steam to raise the humidity. Often, to improve thermodynamic efficiency, most of the air is recirculated and only a {{page:129}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING proportion of fresh air is added, to return the inlet stream to its design condition. However, in hot climates the fresh air may be too hot to provide this function and extra air conditioning equipment must be used. If conditions are dry, as is often the case in the tropics at high altitude, water sprays can be supplied in the fresh air stream to cool the air as the water evaporates, as well as to provide the planned humidity level. If the ambient conditions are humid as well as hot, then refrigeration may have to be supplied so that the fresh, or the return, air can be cooled, in order to condense some of the moisture, and then reheated to the operating point. The process path on the psychrometric chart is shown in Figure 5.7. The potential problem of an excessive heat load on the prover air conditioning system caused by hot tins returning from depanning can be economically averted by adding forced convection cooling on the return tin conveyor. Mechanical handling As well as providing the right process conditions for the proving dough pieces, the prover must be capable of accepting tins at the specified plant rates, holding them for the proof time and delivering them to the oven. Two configurations are common, one where the tin straps are loaded on shelves in a carrier moving on a chain circuit, and the other where the straps are fed onto a continuous conveyor }lI6~----i .044 .036 ~ .028 is E :J s::; 024 () '" i3 ,Q) c. .020 rfJ .016 • •••• 00/)8 .012 ··!<11}t ·'.W$t •• •• ?IJ/, .008 .004 20 30 40 50 Dry bulb temperature ee) Figure 5.7 Refrigerated proving in tropical climates. {{page:130}} that carries them through the proving chamber in a spiral path. Both principles are shown in Figures 5.8 and 5.9. Developments in proving Higher proof temperatures Attempts have been made to run proving commercially at higher temperatures. Higher proof temperatures will warm the dough more quickly, but a steeper Figure 5.8 Prover with carriers. Figure 5.9 Spiral prover. {{page:131}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING temperature gradient through the dough will certainly have an effect on product quality, because it will result in uneven gas production rates and, ultimately, uneven cell structure and texture in the finished loaf. A further disadvantage of proving at higher temperatures is that it makes the effect of a plant stoppage much more dramatic. Although most provers have some extraction facility that can be used to bring down the temperature quickly when there is a plant stoppage, to give more time for the fault to be found and corrected without overproving the dough that is already in the system, it is still a fact that the higher the operating temperature, the shorter this critical time will be. As so often in real processes, the requirements of economics and quality conflict and it is the job of the engineer and the baker to arrive at a sensible compromise. Shorter proof time The other way to reduce proof time is to start proving with the dough already at its optimum temperature of 35-40°C (95-104°F). This has been done on an experimental basis both by using conventional make-up plant followed by a microwave preheater and by using special make-up plant which will handle dough that has been mixed to the required temperature. Neither method has yet proved sufficiently attractive to progress to a full production situation. Prover to oven The transition from prover to oven is a critical phase in the breadmaking process. The loaf is approaching its final volume but is still a completely flexible structure, maintained only by the continuing production of gas within the semiporous cells formed by the membranes of hydrated protein. The first essential is to protect the young loaf from physical damage since, if gas bubble stability is poor, even quite small impacts can destroy the fragile structure. The structure can be particularly delicate in some circumstances, for instance if there are flour quality problems or if the dough has been overmixed, and it is in these circumstances that the product handling system is really tested. The baking process Crumb structure For the centre of the dough piece, the move into the oven is undramatic. It is so well insulated by surrounding dough that it is completely insensitive to any change for the first several minutes of baking and continues at peak gas production. Effectively, the centre of the loaf gets additional proof time which {{page:132}} compensates for its slower start at the beginning of proof. Eventually the centre of the loaf does start to warm up and as the temperature rises, it goes through a compbx progression of physical, chemical and biochemical changes which are independent of the precise conditions in the oven and, therefore, outside the control of the oven operator. Thermodynamically, the situation in the centre is fairly simple. The driving force for heat transfer is the temperature gradient from the region near the crust, where the temperature is limited to the boiling point of water, to the centre. The heat transfer mechanism is conduction along the cell walls and the centre temperature will rise independently of the oven temperature and approach boiling point asymptotically. There is no significant movement of moisture and the moisture content will be the same at the end of baking as at the beginning. Figure 5.10 shows the loaf core temperature (LCT) during baking for three different tin sizes - loaves with a smaller cross-sectional area will bake more quickly. Yeast activity Yeast activity decreases as the dough warms and the yeast is inactivated by the time the temperature has reached 55°C (131°F). Stability of the structure is maintained because the trapped gases expand as they warm and maintain the positive internal cell pressure. 100 mm square 1001 2: ~ ~ 80 " c. E " fo60 40 20 0 10 30 0 20 Time (mins) Figure 5.10 Variation of loaf core temperature with time. {{page:133}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING Starch gelatinization Gelatinization of wheat starch starts at about 60°C (140°F) and initially the starch granules absorb any free water in the dough. The gelatinized starch will eventually be self-supporting and will take over from the protein membranes which, by their gas-retaining properties, have established the form of the loaf but have little intrinsic strength. There is insufficient water in the dough to gelatinize fully the starch, and water will transfer from the protein membranes to the starch as baking proceeds. Starch has remarkable water-retaining capacity and the ease with which gelatinization continues is affected both by starch damage, deliberately imparted during milling (Chapter 12) and by enzyme activity during baking. Enzyme activity Cereal alpha-amylase activity, which is responsible for converting starch into sugars, is at its maximum between 60 and 70°C (140-l58°F) and the amylase is not completely destroyed until the temperature reaches 85°C (185°F). Insufficient amylase activity can restrict loaf volume, because the starch structure becomes rigid too soon, while too much activity, which may be the case after wet harvests, can cause the dough structure to become so fluid that the loaf collapses completely (Chapter 3). It is the timing and volatility of the complex interactions of gelatinization and enzyme activity that determine the quality of crumb in the finished loaf. It is worth reiterating that poor crumb quality is not a baking fault, it is caused by loss of control at an earlier stage in ingredient or dough preparation. Baked temperature A key parameter of loaf quality that the oven operator must monitor is the final core temperature. The definition of 'baked' is an arbitrary one, often determined by the loaf's ability to withstand slicing, but a temperature of 95°C (203°F) at the centre of the loaf at the end of baking is generally accepted as being necessary for the structure to be adequately rigid throughout the loaf. Crust formation Formation of a satisfactory crust is one of the most important aspects of baking - the crust provides most of the strength of the finished loaf and the greater part of the flavour. The thickness and characteristics of the crust to a large extent define the product (Chapter 1). In contrast to the crumb, where changes during baking are largely chemical and biochemical, though initiated by the rising temperature, in the region of the crust very complicated physical mechanisms are at work. Condensation on the {{page:134}} surface of the loaf at the start of baking is essential for the formation of gloss, but quite soon the temperature of the surface rises above the local dew point temperature and evaporation starts. Very soon after that the surface reaches the boiling point of the free liquid, which will be close to 100°C (212°F) and the rate of moisture loss accelerates. As the loaf surface dries, so the evaporation front moves below the surface and the crust of the loaf starts to form. It is important to understand that moisture loss, and therefore weight loss, is an essential part of crust formation, and although it is possible to manipulate oven conditions to reduce weight loss, the characteristics of the loaf, specifically the qualities of the crust, will also change. For a typical plant loaf, with a finished weight of 800 g (28 oz), the weight lost during baking will be 50-55 g (1.8 oz) and anything produced with more crust will inevitably have a higher weight loss. The heat transfer mechanisms at the evaporation front are complex. As well as conduction within the cell walls, each cell acts rather like a heat pipe - water is evaporated at the hot end of the cell, some is lost to the outside but the rest moves across the cell, in the direction of the centre, and condenses at the cold end of the cell, transferring its latent heat before diffusing along the cell wall to evaporate again at the hot end. The evaporation front may develop more quickly at the top surface of an open-topped loaf, but it is present also on all the faces of the loaf. The tin, the supporting grid and any surrounding tins may shield the loaf from convection and radiation to some extent, and so slow down the formation of crust, but the presence of the impermeable tin surface does not prevent evaporation, the steam escaping freely from between the inside walls of the tin and the dough surface. The operation of the evaporation front is shown schematically in Figure 5.11. Outside the evaporation front is the region that is called crust, and here the temperature will continue to rise towards the air temperature in the oven. As it heats further, bound water will be driven off and the crust will acquire its characteristic crispness. Colour comes mainly from Maillard reactions, which start at temperatures above 150°C (302°F). These reactions also produce bread flavour and the aromas of baking, which are so important for in-store bakeries where they act as an advertisement for fresh bread. The rate of formation of crust is approximately linear, so that a loaf baked in 30 min may have a 3 mm (0.12 in) crust thickness, whereas a larger loaf that takes 50 min to bake will have a 5 mm thick crust. The other contributor to crust formation is the continuing expansion of the inside of the loaf, caused first by the final burst of carbon dioxide production from yeast fermentation and then by the thermal expansion of the gases trapped in the cellular structure of the dough. The loaf, if it is in a tin, can only expand upwards. But the sides of the loaf have formed a thin crust and will not move, so cells just inside the crust, in fact those at the evaporation front, are subjected to shear and compression and become flattened and elongated. This effect is most obvious at the top edges of the loaf, where the displacement is greatest and where a split {{page:135}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING Evaporation front Figure 5.11 Heat transfer In the evaporatIOn zone develops as the top crust lifts, exposing a band of elongated inner crust cells, called the 'oven break'. Figure 5.5, which showed how the cells in the dough expand dunng proof, is magrufied further in Figure 5.12, to show how cells near the crust shear to give a compacted layer and expose the shredded oven break. Specific characteristics of the crust can be developed independently. Gloss formation The first seconds of baking are vital for the formation of a glossy crust on the loaf. Again it is a psychrometric problem. As it enters the oven, the surface of the loaf is exposed to high levels of radiation and, sometimes, convection and will increase in temperature very rapidly. To obtain gloss, it is essential that vapour condenses on the surface to form a starch paste that wIll gelatImze, form dextrins and eventually caramelize to give both colour and shine. The pioneering experiments on gloss formation were conducted at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, by Brown and Brownell (1941), and their results are still valuable to the oven designer today. They identified a difference in the way starch can gelatImze on the loaf crust. If there IS excess water, paste-type gelatIOn takes place; if the water availability is insufficient, then crumb-type gelation occurs. {{page:136}} Top comer of proved doughpteee Top corner after baking Figure 5.12 Crust development and oven break. The conditions necessary for a glossy crust are as follows. • The dough must not be overproved. If the dough has reached its maximum volume before leaving the prover, it will not develop satisfactory gloss. • Paste-type gelation must take place before there is any chance of crumb-type gelation. • A minimum oven temperature of 74°e (165°F) must be maintained for sufficient time (at this minimum temperature, the time required would be too long to be practically useful). In fact, the required time varies from 10 min at an oven temperature of 77°e (171°F) to only 15 s at 99°e (210°F). The important condition of excess water on the crust will only happen when the crust temperature is below the dew point temperature of the oven atmosphere at the oven inlet. In practice, this means that, if the oven is at a typical temperature of, say, 225°e (437°F) the dew point temperature needs to be above 93°e (199°F) to ensure that the excess water condition is maintained for long enough. To guarantee suitable conditions usually requires a special inlet section on the oven, called a steam tunnel. The way in which crust temperature depends on dew point temperature is shown in Figure 5.13, with only the top curve satisfying the conditions for high gloss. Notice how the rate of increa~e of the crust temperature levels out as it approaches the dew point temperature. This is the point where condensation changes to evaporation, and exactly how this happens will depend on the air velocity in the region. To make sure that all loaves are treated equally, steam tunnels usually have low air velocities, but this is not a {{page:137}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING e: 100 l' ::> ~ " c. E .!!l 00 " o Dry bulb temperature; 200·C 50 100 200 Time (sees) Figure 5.13 Crust temperature against time for different dew point temperatures. necessary requirement for gloss, it just makes it easier to maintain a high dew point temperature. Crust crispness The pattern of humidity during baking affects another important crust quality besides gloss. Sometimes a smooth, elastic crust is required that can be sliced without disintegrating, but at other times a brittle crust, which will form a mosaic of cracks when cooled, is the marketing specification. The behaviour of the crust will depend mainly on the thickness of the starch paste layer - the thicker the layer, the more likely it is to craze as it cools. This means that when a pliable and glossy crust is required, the conditions for gloss formation must be maintained for the minimum time necessary and thereafter the baking conditions must be comparatively dry. Oven break The shredded band of exposed inner crust that develops during baking at the edges of the loaf, on the join between the top crust and the side crusts, is called the 'oven break'. Most products look best with a regular break some 20 mm (0.75 in) high, but sometimes less is required and it is important to understand which parameters can be used to control the break. Break will increase with volume increase in the oven, so-called 'oven spring', and decrease with crust toughness. Oven spring depends to a large extent on the state of fermentation in the dough when it enters the oven. If fermentation is almost complete, in other words if all the sugars have been converted, then oven spring will be limited. If this point has not been reached, which could happen if not enough yeast has been used, or if the proof temperature is too low or the time too short, then oven spring will be greater and there is more chance of an {{page:138}} excessive break, which can become what is colourfully described as a 'flying top'. Practical baking It is important to check regularly that the heat transfer equipment is in good condition, but for an oven the measurements are more difficult to make than in a prover and may require specialized help, perhaps from the oven manufacturer. A regular flue gas analysis is the simplest way of monitoring the condition of the combustion equipment, while measurements of air temperature and humidity in each oven zone for each product should also be recorded and checked regularly. The best confirmation that all is well is provided by quality control checks on the products themselves, and the most important reading is core temperature at the end of baking. When establishing a quality control procedure to monitor centre loaf temperature, it is important to remember that, just as there is a lag at the start of baking, so the temperature at the loaf centre will continue to rise for several minutes after the loaf has come out of the oven. No oven gives perfectly uniform baking and in some ovens there will be significant differences in temperature depending on position in the oven. The control procedure reflects changes with time and must not be confused with information reflecting unevenness in the oven. Thus it is important to understand the particular oven and always to take samples from the coolest position. The position of the loaf within a tin strap can also affect the heat transfer rates. To be on the safe side, the sample should always be taken from the centre of the strap. Oven design As with provers, the biggest change in plant bakeries in recent years has been away from tunnel ovens towards the single-file conveyorized spiral oven. The simplicity of the concept improves reliability and uniformity of bake while the small inlet and outlet ports, together with the low thermal mass of the conveyor, lead to useful increases in thermal efficiency. An indirect-fired conveyorized oven is shown schematically in Figure 5.14. As with all baking systems, in order to obtain optimum results it is important to design the tins and tin straps to suit the heat transfer capabilities of the oven. Compact straps may increase oven loading, but the overall profitability of the line also depends on loaf-to-loaf variations in centre temperature (and therefore weight loss) and a strap with narrow air passages between tins may cause significant weight loss variations between the end loaves in the strap and those at the centre. Most tins are made from steel, usually 0.8 mm thick with a non-stick coating, but baking time can be reduced by using black anodized aluminium, with the penalty that it is less robust and will not last as long in an automatic handling system. Another trend is to design for radiating surfaces in the oven to be cooler than {{page:139}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING Figure 5.14 Conveyonzed oven used to be the case and to rely on forced convection for a higher percentage of the required heat transfer. This tends to reduce the thermal mass of the oven so that it warms up more quickly and can handle product changes and gaps in production more easily. Baking by convection also results in a more even surface colour than by radiation because the latter possesses the destabilizing characteristic of being absorbed more readily by darker surfaces. In other words, radiation will accentuate contrasts. It is interesting that there has also been a trend towards convection in biscuit ovens over the last 20 years, but there are now signs of the pendulum swinging back, as the required textural and colourrelated properties for some products can only be obtained by mcreasing the radiative component of the heat transfer. Developments in baking As with proving, most of the developments in baking technology have been incremental in nature and have been related to increasing plant output, reducing product variability and improving mechanical reliability. Three technologies that are proven experimentally but not fully implemented commercially offer the potential for markedly reducing baking times. One is dielectric heating, using either radio frequency or microwave power, where the energy is supplied through the bulk of the dough pIece, and It is therefore not surpnsmg that baking {{page:140}} times can be halved. The volumetric transfer of energy will not give rise to an evaporation front in the same way as conventional baking, so any crust formed will be thin and delicate, nor will the skin temperatures reached be high enough to generate colour and flavour in the crust. Possibly these characteristics of dielectric heating will become advantages in the search for the perfect partbaked process, a subject discussed later in this chapter. (For a detailed history of dielectric baking of bread, see Ovadia, 1994.) The second technique uses infrared radiators to increase heat transfer to the loaves. Again, marked reductions in baking time are recorded, but for this technology, where penetration of energy into the loaf surface is shallow, the result is less easy to explain. It seems possible that the crust region, outside the evaporation front, is the heat transfer bottleneck during conventional baking and that the limited penetration (<1 mm) of infrared radiation can overcome this barrier and increase the vigour of the heat pipe mechanism proposed for the evaporation front. Thus although the temperature driving force to heat the crumb is unchanged, this second mechanism increases the heat transfer and rate of temperature rise of the loaf core. The third innovation uses high-velocity convection to improve the rate of heat transfer to the products. The main effect is in the warming-up phase, where baking time is saved by warming up the tin and dough surface more quickly than in a conventional oven and as much heat as possible is transferred while the conductivity of the dough is still relatively high. Such a process is described in an RHM patent (1989), where one embodiment, by way of example, specifies, for the first 10% of the oven length, air nozzle velocities of 25 mls (82 ftls) and a temperature of 375°C (707°F). All these developments are designed to reduce baking time, but they will also have an effect on the interaction of the mechanisms at work during baking and will inevitably change the characteristics of the final loaf. Relatively small reductions in baking time may be very valuable if they allow existing plant to be uprated, but when it is a question of specifying new equipment for a particular output, it is usually more cost effective to use conventional technology in an oven of the appropriate size than to save space by incorporating components to enhance the heat transfer. Oven to cooler As noted earlier, baking and cooling overlap; cooling starts before baking has finished. As soon as the bread reaches the exit of the oven the air temperature will fall below the crust temperature. But the evaporation zone is still operating and the loaf centre is temporarily unaware of the changing outside environment. There is still a temperature gradient and it will continue to get hotter for some minutes. Depanning is usually the next step and this is an operation that can become {{page:141}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING very difficult if the mixing, forming, proving and baking have not been properly controlled. Faults that cause problems include: • underproofed bread that has too much oven spring and such a dislocation around the top crust that the whole top crust comes off under suction; • overproved bread that may have a very weak structure or may be too tall to fit under the suction head; • underbaked bread that may collapse or tear; • sticking of some of the loaves in the tins, possibly caused by erratic tin greasing. Cooling continues as the bread is depanned and transferred to the cooler. During all this time it is in an uncontrolled atmosphere and as well as losing heat, it is rapidly losing moisture. Whilst in the oven, moisture loss is an essential part of crust formation, but once out, any loss is wasted profit and the loaves should be transferred as quickly as possible to the controlled conditions in the cooler. It can easily take 3 min to move a loaf from oven to cooler, and in that time it can lose 12 g (about 0.5 oz). Thinking negatively, this represents 12 g given away unnecessarily, but from a positive viewpoint, evaporating 12 g of water has cooled the loaf significantly and reduced the heat load on the cooler by about one-fifth. The cooling process There are two distinct mechanisms involved in cooling a loaf. The first is by heat transfer, mainly by convection to the surrounding air, but also by radiation and conduction to the structure of the cooler. The second is by evaporation - moisture evaporates from the crust and the energy to evaporate it is drawn from the crust. Typically, an 800 g loaf will lose 20-25 g (about 1 oz) during cooling, which, with the weight it has lost in the transfer from oven to cooler, represents about half the load required to cool the loaf to 25°C (77°P). This is illustrated schematically in Pigure 5.15. It would be quite possible to design a cooler where the evaporation loss was much lower, for instance by having many small, independent cooling zones fed with cold saturated air, but the cooling times would be longer, because most of the heat would have to be removed by convection, and the capital and maintenance costs would be much higher. In practice the most common solution, combining an economic capital installation with a reduced evaporation loss is to have the section where the bread enters the cooler as cold as possible without refrigeration [with air velocities in the region of 1 mls (about 3 ftls) , an air temperature of 20°C (68°P) and a relative humidity of 80%], causing the crust temperature to drop so quickly that the crust will act as a barrier to further moisture loss. {{page:142}} O'~.--------------r-------------r-------------.------ o 50 100 150 TIme (mins) Figure 5.15 The cooling process. In countries where summer ambient conditions are too hot, refrigeration will be necessary to obtain reasonable cooling times combined with low weight loss. Once refrigeration has been decided upon, however, it is worth installing sufficient capacity to run the inlet section of the cooler at SoC (41°F). The initial rapid cooling rate will save another 3-4 g of moisture loss compared with typical, non-refrigerated cooling conditions. Practical cooling Most coolers have no refrigeration and rely on using more fresh air in summer than in winter to maintain constant cooling conditions. The dampers that control the air flow are usually fairly simple, but there may be manual balancing adjustments, and it is important to check that airflow, as well as temperature and humidity, are maintained over the whole operating range. Understanding the cooler and keeping it in good condition is every bit as important as it is for the oven and prover, and a continuous record of temperature and humidity near the beginning and near the end of the product path provides a valuable check, providing the humidity instrumentation is regularly calibrated. Regular cleaning is vital, not only for hygienic reasons, but also to maintain performance, which could be seriously compromised by a furred spray nozzle or blocked filter. {{page:143}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING Uniformity of cooling and weight loss is just as important as absolute performance. If the loaves are at different temperatures, the warmer ones will tend to get squashed in the slicers, and weight loss variability directly affects the target dough piece scaling weight. The target temperature for the centre of the cooled loaf will be about 25°C (77°P) for a sandwich loaf that is sliced on a reciprocating slicer, but if the recipe contains more fat, as in America for example, or if more sophisticated band slicers are installed, then satisfactory slicing will be practicable at higher temperatures and cooling capacity can be saved. Temperatures should be recorded regularly, using the principles described in the baking section, but two techniques are necessary to check the weight loss performance. Regular, planned sampling, which is non-invasive and therefore does not create scrap, will allow the weight variance for the plant to be calculated and by subtracting the variance obtained at the end of the oven, a figure for cooler variance can be found. The variance is found by summing the weight differences from the average and dividing the total by one less than the number of readings. Variances can be subtracted - standard deviations cannot! At this point I shall give up on my stated intention not to include any formulae and give the definition of variance mathematically as: variance =L (x - x)2/(n - 1) where x is the measured variable,x is the mean and n is the number of readings. If there is any sign that cooler variance is increasing, it will be necessary to conduct detailed tests by weighing loaves into the cooler, marking them and weighing them again when they come out. Remember that the loaves are losing weight at their maximum rate on the cooler in-feed, so the initial weighing and marking must be done without upsetting the normal loading progression. Cooler design Just as tunnel ovens and tray provers in plant bakeries are being superseded by systems that use a conveyor that is only one tinstrap wide, so rack coolers, where the bread is loaded onto shelves within a rack which is indexed along the top of the cooler then lowered and returned along the bottom, are being replaced with spiral designs. In fact the technology was born in the refrigeration sector, where the first spiral coolers were built in the 1960s and, because the concept is mechanically simple and inherently subjects all the product to the same processing cycle, it has migrated to proving and baking equipment also. The conveyorized designs have the added advantage that they are generally much easier to clean and access to the air conditioning equipment is better. Developments in cooling As already discussed, conventional bread cooling is by convective heat transfer and evaporative cooling, with the balance slightly in favour of convection. {{page:144}} Process development is active at the two extremes, tilting the balance one way or the other. On the one hand, improvements to the distribution of the air and the control of its condition can further reduce weight loss by minimizing evaporation and, at the other end of the spectrum, most of the heat can deliberately be removed by evaporation, by using a vacuum cooler. Two patents describing ways of improving the condition of the air have been granted to RHM (1988) and Allied Bakeries (1986). The first describes a spiral cooler with multiple zones with successive zones fed from alternate sides of the conveyor, a scheme that allows the contacting air to be maintained at low temperature and high humidity. The second patent describes another method of maintaining the circulating air in peak condition by spraying water onto the surface of the loaves in measured quantities so that it all evaporates before impregnating the crust. In other words, the air is continuously conditioned in the cooling chamber itself. The limitations of this method can be calculated directly from the psychrometric chart. Vacuum cooling is invariably done as a batch process; bread is loaded into a vacuum chamber, which is sealed and partially evacuated. As the pressure falls, so there is a fall in the temperature at which the free water in the loaf boils, and the latent heat for the evaporation is extracted from the loaf, cooling it to slicing temperature in as little as 3 min, as shown in Figure 5.16. 100 ~ ~ " "§ 80 Q) Co E Q) f60 Loaf centre - conventional COOling 40 -Vacuum cooling 20 0 0 50 100 150 Time (mlns) Figure 5.16 Loaf coolmg in a vacuum. {{page:145}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING In practice, the operation is quite sophisticated and the vacuum curve is modified to produce the particular product characteristics that are required. The process has been particularly successful on products where the crust is an important part of the structure, crusty rolls and croissants, for example, and on products which are very delicate and difficult to handle in the warm state, such as malt bread or panettoni. Two of the less obvious advantages of vacuum cooling are that it is relatively easy to maintain sterile conditions and thus gain a little extra product shelf life, which can be critical in large countries with small populations, and it is also possible to reduce baking times, often increasing output by as much as 10%. The reduction in baking time is possible because the loaf centre temperature which satisfies our condition for structure stability is less when the product is vacuum cooled - the speed of cooling, combined with the rapid expansion of the gases within the loaf throughout the cooling period, ensures that the loaf sets at its maximum volume and does not shrink or collapse. The disadvantages of vacuum cooling are the high capital cost of the equipment and the high losses of moisture and the volatile fraction, although the latter can be partially compensated for by reducing the baking time and by introducing a pre-cooling stage to reduce the crust temperature rapidly before applying vacuum. The ideal system of the future might use convection to keep the crust cool and vacuum to accelerate internal heat transfer, reversing the heat pipe mechanism postulated for heat transfer at the evaporation front during baking. Part-baked processes Part-baked bread is a growing market sector throughout Europe, not so much for products for finishing at home, but for products that can be distributed for final baking at the point of sale. The system beautifully combines the economies of scale available where the part-baked loaves are manufactured with the flexibility and freshness obtained by finally baking to satisfy current demand. As the technology develops and the final product quality improves, this process could well come to dominate the industry. Frozen processes In mainland Europe most of the intermediate products are frozen for distribution, often using conventional spiral freezers that have not been specially developed for the bakery industry. This can mean that weight loss is not minimized, and this directly results in problems of icing on the refrigeration coils. The technology will improve, as will the product quality, but it does have the fundamental cost burden that energy has to be expended to freeze each loaf and then again to thaw it. {{page:146}} Ambient processing The leading contender for the ambient part-baked market is the Milton Keynes Process, where vacuum cooling is used after a slow bake to stabilize the intermediate product. The loaves can be distributed and stored in ambient conditions and then be finish baked at the point of sale (Chapter 9). Process economics Weight loss Weight loss at all stages, proving, baking and cooling is an important parameter affecting the economics of plant operation. This is particularly true in countries like Britain, where bread is sold by finished weight and in countries like the USA, where there is a specified maximum water content. Under this sort of legislation, if giveaway is to be minimized, weight loss must be tightly controlled. Minimization of weight loss is less critical in those countnes WhICh sell on a dry weight basis, but uniformity is still important as a quality parameter, as moisture Weight loss through the plant (%) 0.3 0.6 [Cooler 2.5 Figure 5.17 WeIght loss dunng processmg {{page:147}} PROVING, BAKING AND COOLING content will affect both eating qualities and shelf life. Typical commercial figures for each stage of the process are given in Figure 5.17. Selling bread on a dry weight basis is, on the face of it, a sensible arrangement since it removes the competitive temptation to maximize the water content, but it seems unlikely that legislation in this area will be harmonized in the near future. Life cycle costs Life cycle costing (LCC) is an industrial management technique, aiming to: • provide a comprehensive understanding of the total commitment of asset ownership; • identify areas where improvement can be achieved through redesign or reallocation of resources; • improve profitability and increase industrial efficiency. The practice is not widespread in the bakery world, but we often lag behind the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. It will come and when it does the leading companies will enjoy a competitive advantage during the transition period. The methodology for life cycle costing was recently standardized in IEC (TC56) (1996), which puts costs into perspective by modelling the total cost of Life cycle cost I I Ownership AcqUISition I Maintenance Engineering PurchaSing Disposal Operations Labour Parts & stock Production Indirect costs Future costs are discounted to give present value ~ Breakdown Scheduled Labour Energy Raw matenals Recovered Waste Quality Giveaway Cleaning Changeover Legislation Downtime capaCity Figure 5.18 Breakdown of hfe cycle costs {{page:148}} operating a process plant for the whole of its planned life. It is particularly valuable when new equipment is being considered, when quite a small change in specification can yield huge savings during the life of the plant, but unless data are collected in a useful format during normal bakery operation, the costing model will be based on conjecture rather than fact. For instance, some bakeries regard maintenance and cleaning as overhead charges and this makes it impossible to justify extra capital investment that might reduce maintenance requirements or make cleaning easier. The life cycle cost approach also forces the equipment supplier and the user to work closely together, ensuring that the supplier fully understands all the operational implications of design decisions. By specifying performance guarantees in terms of the model for life cycle costs, the supplier is committed to a realistic initial model and the user is much better placed to make the investment decisions that will maximize profitability. Suitable categories for structuring life cycle costs for a bakery are given in Figure 5.18. References Alhed Bakenes Ltd (1986) Method of coolmg baked goods, GB Patent 2 134 636B, 20 August, HMSO, London Brown, G G and Brownell, L E (1941) Umverslty of MIchIgan, Ann Arbor, sponsored project for APV Baker Inc InternatIOnal Electrotechmcal Committee (TC56) (1996) AppilcatlOn GUide on LIfe Cycle Costmg OvadJa, D (1994) Dlelectnc bakmg of bread - past and future MIcrowave World, 15(2),16-22 Rank HOVIS McDougall (1988) A method and apparatus for coohng foodstuffs, GB Patent 2 206 190A, 29 December, HMSO, London Rank HOVIS McDougall (1989) Travellmg bread cooler, GB Patent 2 217 969A, 8 November, HMSO, London {{page:166}}
