---
book: "Technology of Breadmaking"
book_slug: "cauvain-technology-of-breadmaking"
author: "Stanley P. Cauvain & Linda S. Young"
lang: "en"
relevance: "core"
chapter: "Chapter 6: Dough retarding and freezing"
heading: "Chapter 6: Dough retarding and freezing"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 6: Dough retarding and freezing"]
order: 6
source_page: 166
tokens_est: 17508
---

# Chapter 6: Dough retarding and freezing

{{page:166}} STANLEY P. CAUVAIN Introduction Over the years bakers have sought ways to extend the working life of dough, which is otherwise largely limited by the natural processes of yeast fermentation, enzymic activity and structural relaxation of the gluten. Improvements in production efficiency have been the main driving force for the baker to seek such extensions in dough life. For example, some products are required in small numbers, which necessitates mixing small batches of dough, but maximum production efficiency is more often achieved by producing larger quantities of dough than those needed for a single day's product sales. Other driving forces for extending dough shelf life have included the avoidance of unsocial working hours and local restrictions on night baking. Since yeast fermentation is significantly slowed down by lowering the dough temperature, it was only natural that attention would be focused on the application of refrigerated and deep-freeze temperatures to yeasted doughs. If the dough temperature is reduced low enough yeast fermentation will cease altogether and the dough can be held in what approximates to a state of suspension. Early experiments with the refrigeration of yeasted doughs was to lead eventually to the development of the process which has become known as 'dough retarding' and which utilizes specialist refrigeration equipment. There are both similarities and significant differences between retarded and frozen doughs. They share the common problems associated with the poor conductivity of dough but require quite different equipment if both processes are to run under optimized conditions. Retarding and deep freezing of yeasted doughs are not necessarily the 'convenience' products that they are sometimes claimed to be. For example, the early introduction of retarding and deep freezing techniques into UK craft bakeries during the 1950s met with some success but gradually the limitations of the technology and the equipment reduced their impact on the baking industry. The evolution of the 'in-store' bakery resulted in a revival of interest in retarded doughs in the UK. In other European countries the use of retarders has remained more common since their introduction, perhaps in part because of the continued survival of large numbers of small, craft bakers where there are limitations on working practices, or where the retarding process is seen to be making a positive contribution to product quality. The production of frozen doughs had less appeal to the craft baker and was © Thomson Science 1998 {{page:150}} more suited to centralized production of the frozen units, with distribution to satellite storage and bake-off. The popularity of frozen dough products has always been less in Europe than that in the USA, where there are significant numbers of bake-off units using frozen dough technology (Best, 1995). With improvements in technical understanding and process control, the use of frozen dough in Europe has increased. Retarding fermented doughs* Most fermented goods can be produced successfully via retarded dough, provided that retarding and proving conditions are chosen to suit the product type. As discussed in more detail in the section on freezing, dough is a relatively poor conductor of heat and in consequence products having a large radius, such as pan bread dough pieces, will take longer to cool and warm than those with a small radius, such as French sticks and rolls. Further, dough pieces with large radii are much more likely to cool, or warm, with larger temperature differentials between the centre and surface of a piece of dough, which are likely to have an adverse effect on final product quality. Therefore the range of conditions that can be used to produce acceptable bread is less than for smaller fermented goods so that if retarders or retarder-provers are to be used for mixed large and small goods production, the conditions in the units should be set to achieve optimum large-bread quality. Suitability of breadmaking processes All the major breadmaking processes described in Chapter 2 may be used for producing dough intended for retarding, though the most suitable are those which are based on no-time breadmaking processes. The process of retarding dough will not improve the overall product quality, so the recipe used, the choice of improver and processing conditions must be compatible with the breadmaking process chosen. Breadmaking processes which use periods of bulk fermentation as a major part of the dough development mechanism are least suited to retarding for two main reasons. First, the level of yeast in the recipe is an integral part of dough development so that any changes in yeast level for purposes described later would require compensatory changes in bulk fermentation time or dough temperature, or both. Second, the greater quantity of gas present in bulkfermented doughs as they enter the retarder may have an adverse effect on final product quality. Sponge and dough breadmaking processes may be used to *To avoid unnecessary repetition the tenn 'retarding' will refer to the cooling process which takes place in both 'retarders' and 'retarder-provers' so that references to retarders should be taken to include retarder-provers, and vice versa, unless specified otherwise. {{page:151}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING produce doughs for retarding, the best results being obtained if no bulk fermentation time is given after the sponge has been mixed into the dough. Under most retarding temperatures fermentation continues, albeit at a low rate. Using sponge and dough processes in such circumstances may raise the 'acid' flavour of the baked product to an unacceptably high level and will require adjustment of the sponge conditions. No significant changes are necessary to the mixing or processing conditions used with short or no-time breadmaking processes. It is unnecessary to lower the final dough temperatures, although this practice is often used as a means of reducing yeast fermentation before and during the early stages of retarding. However, it is not recommended, especially in breadmaking processes where improvers are a necessary part of dough development since lowering of the dough temperature will reduce the contribution of any oxidizing agents and enzymes present. As a general principle doughs should be processed and loaded into the retarding unit as quickly as possible in order to avoid excessive gas production and any losses of quality which may arise from undue delays. This requirement for minimizing delays before the dough enters the retarder must be balanced against the practical requirements of the bakery. For instance, it may take some time for the bulk of the dough from the mixer to be divided and processed. The length of this operation will depend, in part, on the size of mixing that has been produced. As a general rule delays greater than 20 and certainly 30 min should be avoided. It may be necessary to mix smaller quantities of dough than normal in order to achieve more rapid processing. The frequency with which processed dough batches are transferred to the retarder also requires some control, otherwise frequent opening of the retarder doors will continually raise the temperature in the retarder and reduce its effectiveness in cooling the dough pieces. Rapid chilling of the dough pieces is necessary if gas production in the retarding phase is to be minimized and is especially important with dough pieces of larger radius. Each time the retarder door is opened there will be an exchange of air with the bakery atmosphere. The air in the retarder will have a higher relatively humidity than that of the bakery. This exchange will increase the risk of dough pieces 'skinning'. Similar problems will be encountered if the retarder is only partly loaded. The relationship between products and retarder relative humidity is discussed further below. Recipe and yeast level When deciding on a recipe to use for retarded doughs it is essential to choose one which will give products of acceptable quality in fresh production. Usually the only change in dough recipe required for retarding is to adjust the yeast level, the degree of adjustment depending on the process and equipment being used. With no-time doughmaking processes the adjustment of yeast level is not a problem since it is relatively easy to adjust proof temperatures, times or both. {{page:152}} However, with bulk fermentation processes, changes in yeast level will affect the balance between yeast quantity, dough temperature and bulk fermentation time which is required in order to achieve optimum dough development. For example, if yeast levels were to decrease, it would be necessary to combat the underfermentation which would arise by a simultaneous lengthening of the bulk fermentation period, or an increase in bulk dough temperature, or both. As a general rule, raising the dough temperature by 2'C will require a compensatory decrease of about 25% of the current yeast level; this alteration will slow down the rate at which the dough proves after retarding. The choice of yeast level in retarded doughs is intimately linked with dough piece size, storage temperature and time, proving conditions and, of course, the desired product quality. There are such a large number of potential combinations of these factors that it is not possible to set down precise rules for adjusting the yeast level in retarded doughs. The choice of level also depends on whether the baker is using a separate retarder and prover or a combined retarder-prover. In the former case the practice is often to keep yeast at the same levels as for scratch production, or even to increase yeast levels so that when the colder than normal dough enters the prover, final proof times remain conveniently short. Such practices limit the types of products which can be successfully retarded to those of small radius or with higher levels of enrichment. The automatic control on retarder-provers (see below) allows for greater flexibility and choice of retarding and proving conditions. In such cases a wider range of products can be made and product quality can be more closely controlled. When using retarder-provers it has become common practice to reduce yeast levels, especially with larger dough pieces, to avoid losses in quality associated with 'skinning' and 'white spots'. The relative humidity (RH) of the dough when it first enters the retarder is much higher than that of the air in the retarder. Typically the equilibrium relative humidity of the dough is between 90 and 95% (equivalent to water activities of between 0.90 and 0.95) and the RH of the air around 60%. During the early stages of retarding the dough loses moisture from its surface as it tries to achieve equilibrium with the air. The cooling coil in the retarder is designed to maintain as high an RH as possible, but the dough pieces will progressively lose moisture during storage as shown by the example for 60 g (2 oz) rolls illustrated in Figure 6.1. The overall weight loss from a dough piece during retarded storage is directly affected by the yeast level and is greater with increasing yeast level. The more moisture that is lost from the dough piece, the greater is the risk of the formation of the dry surface which bakers call skinning. The mechanism of the formation of this skin is not fully understood but the phenomenon is largely irreversible. The potential for greater weight losses from retarded doughs with higher yeast levels is due in part to the greater expansion and accompanying increase in the surface area of the dough piece. An example of this effect is illustrated in Figure 6.2 where the volume of 60 g dough pieces made with four different yeast levels and stored for 3 days at 3°C (38°F) are compared. For the highest yeast level {{page:153}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING 6 Storage temperature (0 C) 0 +3 .. ~ 5 .. -1 • -5 0 ..Q .. 4 • - 9 .J:; Cl 'iii ~ III 3 (.) III '5. .J:; Cl :l 2 0 0 1 0 2 3 Storage time (days) Figure 6.1 Effect of storage time and temperature on weight loss from 60 g dough pieces, 6 Yeast level (%) o 3 ~ 5 .. .. o 2 • 1,5 ..Q • 1 .§,4 'iii ~ ~ 3 " '5. .J:; Cl 5 2 o 1+-----,------r-----, o 2 3 Storage time (days) Figure 6.2 Effect of storage time and yeast level on weight loss from 60 g dough pieces, illustrated, 3% flour weight, the increase in volume approaches threefold. Such an increase is very similar to that observed under normal proof at much higher temperatures, though with shorter times, Retarding temperature The initial cooling rate of the dough and the temperature at which the storage phase is carried out have a considerable influence on final product quality, The effect of retarding temperature, whatever the equipment used, can be considered in three broad temperature ranges: {{page:154}} • above the freezing point of water, 0 up to 5°C (32-41°F); • between 0 and -5°C (32-23°F), the latter being the approximate freezing point of bread dough; • below -5°C (23°F). The rate at which dough pieces cool when placed in a retarder depends to a large extent on the temperature within the unit; in general the lower the retarding temperature the faster the cooling rate. An example of how retarding temperature affects the rate of cooling is given in Figure 6.3, where the effects of four different retarding temperatures on the temperature at the centre of dough pieces for 60 g rolls are compared. The sharp rise in temperature at the centre of the dough pieces cooled at -9°C (16°F) coincides approximately with the temperature at which the roll dough pieces froze. The freezing point of the roll dough is somewhat lower than that of a standard UK bread dough because of the presence of sugar in the formulation. The actual rate at which dough pieces cool is more complicated than the example given in Figure 6.3. Fermented doughs are poor conductors of heat, and because of this the rate at which the centre cools is much lower than that of the surface. The actual differences in cooling rates between the surface and centre are related in part to the retarding temperature but are mostly influenced by product size, or more specifically product radius; the larger the dough piece radius the greater, the temperature differential for a given retarding temperature. Yeast activity in the dough continues during the initial cooling and subsequent storage periods as long as the temperature is not so low as to cause the dough to freeze. The activity is more vigorous in the warmer parts of the dough, such as the centre, because of the poor conductivity of the dough. In some circumstances considerable gas production and expansion of the dough can 30 Storage temperature (OC) 0+3 D - 1 G 20 • -5 0 • -9 f! ;l E .. 10 Co E .. ... .. ... ... c: .. 0 U -10 0 120 180 60 Time (min) Figure 6.3 Effect of retarding temperature on changes in 60 g dough piece centre temperature. {{page:155}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING occur. The actual quantity of gas produced depends on the yeast level, initial dough temperature, retarding temperature, the ability of the dough to retain the gas being produced and several other factors. The influence of retarder storage temperature on the expansion of 60 g roll dough pieces with the same yeast level is illustrated in Figure 6.4. For dough pieces placed for storage in a unit set at -9°e (16°F) there is a small degree of expansion which stops once the dough is frozen. At higher storage temperatures the dough can continue to expand so that at 3°e (38°F) the dough piece can double in size during retarded storage. Weight losses from the dough pieces during storage are also significantly influenced by the retarding temperature, with greater weight losses being sustained at higher temperatures (Figure 6.5). As discussed above, weight losses are linked with skinning of the dough pieces and subsequent quality losses in the 240 Storage temperature (DC) 0+3 § 200 Cl - 1 Q) • -5 E • -9 j "0 ~ 160 u Q) '5. .:: ~ 120 o o 2 3 Storage time (days) Figure 6.4 Effect of storage time and temperature on dough piece volume. 240 Yeast level (%) o 3 o 2 § 200 • 1.5 Q) E • 1 :l "0 > Q) 160 u Q) '5. .:: C) 5 120 o 80~------.------.r------' o 2 3 Storage time (days) Figure 6.5 Effect of storage time and yeast level on dough piece volume. {{page:156}} final product. When stored at temperatures between 0 and -5°C (32-23°F) the surfaces of the dough pieces may be dry to the touch but are less likely to develop a thick skin, unless stored for more than 3 days. Products made from dough pieces which have skinned frequently exhibit irregular shapes and always have a crust colour with a pale grey cast. In extreme cases, dough pieces may lean towards air inlets because the part of the dough facing the inlet air is subjected to greater moisture loss, so that expansion during proof is uneven and is severely restricted by the skinning. Although many retarder-provers can operate at temperatures below -5°C they are not recommended for freezing dough because of their low freezing rates. While setting retarder-provers at temperatures below -5°C will increase the cooling rate, the poor conductivity of dough combined with the low freezing rate achieved in most units allows gas production to continue at the centre of the dough piece for some time after the surface has become frozen. Within the dough piece sufficient expansion can occur to cause the frozen surface to crack. These cracks in the surface do not close during the post-retarding phases and remain on the surface of the baked product. Dough pieces of large radius are more likely to display this problem than smaller ones. Storage time The longer dough pieces are stored under retarded conditions, the poorer the final product quality will be. The nature and magnitude of the decline in quality depends on factors such as dough piece size, yeast level and storage temperature. As a general rule the storage period for retarded doughs seldom exceeds 3 days. The volume of dough pieces generally increases as storage times increase. The rate of increase of dough piece volume with time is greater for higher storage temperatures and yeast levels (Figures 6.4 and 6.5). Despite the increase in dough volume which occurs during storage, there is usually a progressive loss of volume in the baked product, the appearance of surface blemishes becomes more common and the cell structure becomes more open. These defects in product quality can be minimized, and in many cases prevented, by lowering the yeast level, storage temperature, or both, within the limits already discussed. Weight losses from dough pieces increase with increasing storage time. This progressive weight loss from the dough pieces is mostly related to the loss of moisture. Although there is a contribution to weight loss from any escaping carbon dioxide gas resulting from the slow but continuing yeast fermentation of sugars, either natural or added in the dough, weight losses from this source are small despite the long fermentation times which are involved. Moisture lost from the dough pieces is held in the air in the retarder as the RH reaches equilibrium with the dough. After this point is reached weight losses should cease, but during the operation of the retarder some of the moisture in the air will form as ice on the coils, however efficient the {{page:157}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING design of the latter. The formation of ice removes moisture and lowers the RH of the air, which becomes lower than the equilibrium relative humidity (ERH) of the dough, and so further moisture losses occur as the system again tries to reach equilibrium. As well as condensation on the coils, some moisture will be lost from the retarder through the opening and closing of the doors and some smaller losses occur through door seals. Some of the moisture losses are offset in retarders which incorporate a defrosting cycle in their normal operation, since the water generated from the melting ice on the coils returns to the air within the retarder. The rate of moisture loss with increasing storage time is greater at higher storage temperatures as shown in Figure 6.1, because the saturated vapour pressure (SVP) of the air is lower as its temperature falls. The lower SVP means that a smaller quantity of water is required to achieve saturation of the air. Weight losses with increasing storage time are also lower with higher yeast levels (Figure 6.2). The progressive loss of weight which occurs in all dough pieces must be taken into account when deciding on the initial scaling weight to be used, especially for products which are subject to weight control at the point of sale. Enzymic activity in the dough also continues during storage, the rate of the action depending on the storage temperature used. One enzyme to be noted in this context is alpha-amylase which may occur naturally in the flour as cereal alpha-amylase or may be added by the miller or baker as malt flour or as fungal alpha-amylase preparations. Alpha-amylase breaks down the damaged starch to produce soluble carbohydrates and dextrins, some of which caramelize during baking to give the product a darker crust colour which may be undesirable. Other potential enzymic action in the dough during retarding can include the actions of proteinase and protease, the collective actions of which are to weaken the dough structure through interaction with the flour proteins. This may lead to a loss of gas retention and spreading or flow of the dough during retarding which will be accentuated during proof and the early stages of baking. Such enzymic actions will certainly contribute to the progressive quality losses observed with increasing storage times. Proving and baking At the end of the retarding cycle the dough must be proved and expanded ready for transfer to the oven for baking. Even under scratch production the poor conductivity of dough results in a temperature differential between surface and centre. Since retarded doughs are much colder than scratch doughs it is important to raise the temperature of the dough piece gradually and uniformly during the warm phases of the proof cycle. There are two main ways in which this can be achieved; one is to use cool proving temperatures and the other is to modify yeast levels. Proof to a constant dough piece volume is a time and temperature-dependent {{page:158}} operation so that any reduction in proof temperature requires a compensatory increase in proof time, and vice versa. When proving retarded doughs, uniform heating is probably more critical than overall proof time. This is especially true of retarder-provers, where the change from retarding to heating is automatically controlled and the absolute timing of the switch from one state to another IS less critical. The effect of proving temperature on the quality of pan breads from retarded doughs is illustrated in Figure 6.6. Both dough pieces were proved to constant volume in the pan before entering the oven and the extra oven spring exhibited by the dough proved at 21°C (70°F) results from the more uniform temperature distribution within the pIece. Although the dough pIece proved at the higher temperature had reached the same volume, it had done so with a larger temperature differential m the dough. In effect, the outer layers of the piece were overproved and the mner layers underproved; the former would be overexpanded and exhibit reduced gas retention, and the latter would be too cold to achieve full gas production before bemg set in the oven. An alternative way in which to control the uniformity of proof IS to prolong the proving time by manipulating the yeast level. ThIS approach has a dual benefit for the quality of the retarded dough in that it will also decrease the likelIhood of quality defects such as white spot formation or skmning. An example of the benefits of lower yeast levels is illustrated WIth pan breads in Figure 6.7. Once again, all dough pieces were proved to constant volume before they were transferred for bakIng and the extra oven spring with the lowest yeast level arIses from the more uniform temperature distribution within the dough. Such results are largely the OppOSIte WIth scratch doughs. A cntIcal factor In determmIng the chOIce of proving condItions wIll be the imtial SIZe of the dough pIece. For the Figure 6.6 Effect of provmg temperature on bread qUality, left, 40 and nght, 21°C (700P) {{page:159}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING , 2·0% 1'0% 1'5% Yeastl level Figure 6.7 Effect of yeast level on bread qualIty same conditions of yeast level and proving temperature, differentials within the piece will be greater for dough pieces of large radius than those of small radius, just as they were in cooling. In the case of processes where the retarder and the prover are separate pieces of equipment, it is helpful to introduce a 'recovery' stage between the two units to help minimize dough piece temperature differentials. Traditionally recovery is carried out in the bakery to raise dough temperatures to around 16°C (600P), depending on ambient temperature, the dough piece size and other factors. The doughs will need to be covered to prevent moisture losses and skinning. Adjustment to the baking conditions when usmg retarded doughs is usually unnecessary, except with higher storage temperatures and longer storage times which may lead to increased enzymic activity and darker crust colours. Undesirably high crust colour can be lessened by lowering slightly the level of ingredients, such as skimmed milk powder, sugars and malt flour, which also contribute to crust colour. Guidelines for retarded dough production There are many potential combinations of yeast level, dough piece size, retarding temperature, storage time and proof time which will give acceptable retarded products, and so it is not possible to give 'rules' by which they should be produced. It is possible however to give some general guidelines on which to base choices. They include the following: • reduce yeast levels as storage times increase; • keep yeast levels constant when using separate retarders and provers; • reduce yeast levels as the dough radius increases; {{page:160}} • reduce yeast levels with higher storage temperatures; • the lower the yeast level used, the longer the proof time will be to a given dough piece volume; • yeast levels should not normally be less than 50% of the level used in scratch production; • for doughs stored below -5°C, the yeast level may need to be increased; • reduce the storage temperature to reduce expansion of and weight loss from dough pieces; • lower the yeast levels to reduce expansion and weight losses at all storage temperatures; • dough pieces of large radius are more susceptible to the effects of storage temperature; • the low freezing rate achieved in most retarder-provers combined with the poor thermal conductivity of dough can cause quality losses; • prove dough pieces of large radius at a lower temperature than those of small radius; • lower the yeast level in the dough to lengthen the final proof time and to help minimize temperature differentials; • maintain a high relative humidity in proof to prevent skinning. Retarding pizza doughs Some pizza restaurants store ready-made dough bases in a refrigerator or retarder, withdrawing them for topping and baking as required. Proof may be given to the bases either before entering the refrigerator or oven, or both. The composition of pizza bases is not too dissimilar to that of other fermented products and so the effects of yeast level and retarding temperature follow the same pattern. Since the base dough is usually thin, the cooling rate is very rapid, as is the warming rate but the large surface area of the base makes them susceptible to skinning unless precautions are taken to cover the surfaces, for example by stacking pans inside one another. Novel methods for producing consistent pizza base quality using retarder-provers have been developed based on an automatically controlled cold-warm-cold cycling (Cauvain, 1986). The technique makes use of the narrow cross-section of the bases and after shaping and panning-up consists of three storage conditions: 1. an initial retarding period of up to 24 h at -4°C (25°P); 2. a proof period of 3-4 h at 21°C (700P); 3. a return to retarding at -4°C where the bases are held until required and then withdrawn for immediate topping and baking. It is not usual to retard dough pieces which have undergone proof or significant fermentation before cooling because of potential problems with quality losses, {{page:161}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING especially the formation of white spots. However, in the case of the thin pizza base the cooling is so rapid that significant quality losses cannot occur. Once in the second retarded condition the bases remain relatively unchanged for up to 8 h. Freezing fermented doughs The problems of cooling dough associated with its poor conductivity have already been referred to above in the section on retarding. The low temperatures required to freeze fermented doughs and suspend yeast activity exacerbate those problems associated with poor conductivity, and restrict the choice of breadmaking process which may be used for the manufacture of frozen dough even more than with retarded doughs. However, despite these drawbacks the range of dough sizes which may be frozen and stored is somewhat greater than that usually encountered with retarded doughs. Breadmaking process, recipe and yeast The instability of frozen doughs made with significant periods of fermentation before freezing has been shown by a number of workers (Godkin and Cathcart, 1949; Merritt, 1960; Kline and Sugihara; 1968). Straight or no-time doughmaking processes, such as the Chorleywood Breadmaking Process (CBP), provide the most suitable processes for frozen dough production, as does sponge and dough, provided that the sponge is combined with a no-time doughmaking stage. The recipe for frozen doughs should be based on one which yields acceptable product quality in scratch production, and it is essential that the recipe formulation and the choice of fat and composite improver are compatible with the breadmaking process chosen. The loss of gassing activity in frozen doughs is well documented (Cauvain, 1979; Dubois and Blockcolsky, 1986) and is most obviously manifested as an increase in proof time with increasing storage of the frozen dough (Figure 6.8). The illustrated results not only show the significant difference in proof time between the two yeast levels used but also suggest that the rate at which proof time increased with increasing storage time was lower with 2% than with 4% yeast. The loss in gassing activity is mainly due to the loss of viable yeast cells during the initial freezing and during subsequent storage and, as shown in Figure 6.8, can be compensated for by raising the yeast level in the recipe. In addition to the loss of gassing, there is a progressive loss of product volume with increasing storage as illustrated in Figure 6.9. Unlike the effect on proof times, the rates at which product volumes decreased with storage time were similar for both 2 and 4% yeast. Volume losses with frozen dough typically occur even when dough pieces are proved to the same volume before entering the oven. Loss of oven spring accounts for the volume difference and is probably linked with the release of {{page:162}} 140 _100 c g G) ... ... o o E d: 60 20~--~------~------~ 20 100 60 Storage time (days) Figure 6.8 Effect of yeast level and storage time on proof time. 1500 :g II> E ~ 1300 > -.. o ..J 1100.1.---.------.------, 60 20 100 Storage time (days) Figure 6.9 Effect of yeast level and storage time on loaf volume. enzymes and reducing agents from the contents of dead and disrupted cells (Hsu et aI., 1979). Weakening of frozen dough can occur independently of any detectable loss of yeast activity (Bruinsma and Giesenschlag, 1984), although it is not clear just how significant this effect is in comparison with the effect of yeast cell contents. The same processes also most certainly account for the appearances of large blisters on some dough pieces during proof, a condition which is commonly associated with the use of weak flours and the lack of gas retention in scratch doughmaking. Casey and Foy (1995) reviewed the effects of freezing and thawing on yeast cells and the mechanism by which cell damage occurred. In particular they considered the work of Mazur (1970), which showed that the yeast cell {{page:163}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING membranes lose their ability to block the passage of ice crystals below about -10 to -15°C (14-5°F). Usually frozen dough products reach temperatures around -20°C (-4°F), if not during initial freezing then certainly during frozen storage. Ice crystals probably continue to grow with increasing storage time and under these conditions we can expect significant damage to cell membranes. The practical evidence reinforces the critical nature of the storage temperature on yeast activity with increases in proof time of thawed dough pieces being less if they have been stored at -10 than at -20°C (Figure 6.10). The compensatory increase in yeast level which is required depends in part on the length of the anticipated frozen storage time. For short periods of storage, say 3-4 days, an increase in yeast level may be unnecessary, while for periods of up to 30 days increases of up to 50% may be required. For storage periods in excess of 30 days an increase in yeast level of 100% may be necessary. The susceptibility of yeast cells to damage, both during the initial freezing and subsequent frozen storage, has led to the development of yeast strains with improved freeze-thaw resistance. Current developments and strategies for future developments have been thoroughly reviewed by Casey and Foy (1995). In some cases the new yeast strains have initially slower gassing rates compared to standard yeast which make them more suitable for the production of frozen dough (Hino et ai., 1987; Baguena et ai., 1991). Other approaches have included the use of trehalose-enriched yeasts, with the trehalose acting as a cryoprotective agent (D' Amore et ai., 1991), and the application of dried yeasts, although successes with the latter have been somewhat variable (Spooner, 1990; Neyreneuf and Van der Plaat, 1991). Processing andJreezing doughs As discussed above with retarded dough no changes to standard mixing techniques are necessary and changes to dough temperatures should be avoided. Once again, the temptation is to use doughs which are colder than normal in Storage temperature (OC) 100 0·10 0·20 ~ 80 E 60 . ., '040 e a. 20 O+-~--~~~--~~--~~-,­ o 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Storage time (days) Figure 6.10 Effect of storage time and temperature on proof time. {{page:164}} order to reduce gassmg aCtivIty m the dough before It enters the freezer, but thIS wIll have an adverse effect on dough oXIdatIOn and enzymIc actIOn and the benefits of controlhng gassmg may well be lost m reduced bread volume and poorer cell structure Doughs should be processed as rapIdly as possIble m order to aVOId exceSSIve gas productIOn before freezmg, espeCIally If yeast levels WhICh are hIgher than normal have been used It may be necessary to mIX smaller quantities of dough than normal m order to achIeve more rapId processmg The OffilSSIOn of mtermedlate proof between fIrSt and second mouldmg reduces gassmg actiVIty before freezmg and shghtly reduces the vulnerabIhty of yeast cells The resultmg bread has a shghtly fmer cell structure and IS less prone to the formatIOn of small whIte spots on the surface of the product These effects are related to Improvements m gas retentIOn m the dough, WIth shorter fmal proof times to constant heIght (FIgure 6 11) and better loaf volume WIth mcreasmg storage time (FIgure 612) A SImple but often overlooked effect of the freezmg process IS that It fIxes the dImensIOns of a dough pIece, and It may be necessary for some adjustment to be made to the moulder m order to ensure that the frozen pIeces wIll fIt m pans, or on trays, at the pomt of end use before defrostmg Dough pIeces should be transferred to the freezmg umt as qUIckly as possIble after fmal mouldmg to reduce gassmg actIVIty and yeast vulnerabIhty The freezmg operatIon IS best carned out as rapIdly as possIble to mhibit yeast aCtiVIty Of the types of freezer avaIlable, the blast freezer offers the best comproffilse between speed and operatmg temperatures It IS recommended that no part of the dough IS subjected to temperatures lower than -35°C (-30°F) to aVOId exceSSIve damage to the yeast cells present m the dough Domestic-type freezers are generally not SUItable for producmg large quantities of frozen dough 120 Intermediate proof o With i: g E .. G> 80 ..... 0 0 It 40 20 100 60 Storage time (days) Figure 6.11 Effect of mtermedlate proof and storage time on proof {{page:165}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING 1500 ~ CD E ~ 1300 > ..... Intermediate proof: III ..9 o with o without 1100.1..--...,..----.....,.--------, 100 60 20 Storage time (days) Figure 6.12 Effect of intennediate proof and storage time on loaf volume. because the very low freezing rate (defined as the change of temperature within a dough piece in unit time, typically less than -0.21 °C/min in a domestic chest freezer) allows too much gas production to occur in the early stages of cooling with a subsequent loss of product quality. The low freezing rate that is achieved in most retarder-provers also largely makes then unsuitable for producing deep-frozen dough pieces, except for those products with a small radius, such as rolls. In a typical blast freezer variations in air velocity have negligible effects on dough performance and bread quality (Cauvain, 1979). The changes which occur in fermented doughs during freezing are mostly related to the size of the dough piece and the temperature at which freezing takes place. Dough pieces with large radii take longer to reach a given temperature at the centre than those with small radii. Figure 6.13 illustrates changes in the temperature at the centre of a dough piece for a typical range of bakery dough pieces during freezing. Plotting the freezing rates for these dough pieces against dough radius (Figure 6.14) confirms the close relationship between the two parameters. Further confirmation of the critical role of dough piece radius is given in Table 6.1, where the freezing rates of dough pieces each weighing 910 g (2 lb) but having different configurations are compared. In addition to affecting freezing rate, the radius of the dough piece will also affect the temperature differential which will be set up between the surface and centre. As discussed above with retarded doughs, pieces with large radii will cool with a larger temperature differential than those with small radii. An example of the changes which can occur during the freezing of a 460 g (1 lb) cylindrical dough piece are illustrated in Figure 6.15. In this example the centre temperature has taken nearly twice as long as the surface temperature to reach the frozen state, around -5°C (23°F), as shown by the inflexion on the centre temperature curve in Figure 6.3 after 80 min. In dough pieces with large radii the temperature at the centre remains relatively high {{page:166}} 30 Dough piece weight (g) 060 20 0120 G .260 ~ .460 OIl 10 ... 0910 ~ !! OIl c. E OIl ... 0 ! ... c: G> u ·10 ·20 Figure 6.13 Changes of centre temperature WIth freezIng tIme c ~ 2 u o o+------,------~----~ o 6 2 4 Radius of dough piece (em) Figure 6.14 Effect of dough pIece radIUs on freezIng rate Table 6.1 Effect of radIUs on dough freezIng rate FreezIng Normnal Length RadIUs Volume (cm) (cm) (cm') shape rate (OC/rmn) 220 884 046 375 CylInder 075 550 250 1080 CylInder 797 024 Sphere {{page:167}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING 30 Air temperature (-35 0 C) o Centre temperature 20 o Surface temperature G 10 o e :J e O+--.......::._---r~...,...--"""T'""---___, Time (min) 120 CD Q. E ~ -10 -20 -30 Figure 6.15 Effect of freezing time on dough temperature. Table 6.2 Freezing times and rates Centre temperature Time taken Average freezing achieved to cool from 30°C rate (0C) (OC/min) (min) 47 0.62 0 -10 0.44 86 0.44 -20 110 for long periods of time, which allows considerable gas production to occur. The dough piece can, depending on yeast level, expand by up to 50% of its original volume. Typical times taken for a standard dough piece to reach three given centre temperatures in a blast freezer are given in Table 6.2 together with the calculated freezing rates. Frozen products need to be held in storage below their glass transition temperatures in order to prevent change and deterioration during the storage period. Glass transition temperatures are formulation sensitive and so, in theory at least, every product will have its own unique minimum storage temperature. In commercial practice a storage temperature of about -20oe (-4 OF) is usually applied, which is well below the glass transition temperature of fermented dough formulations. There is always a temptation for dough pieces to be transferred to frozen storage once the surface is frozen but, as the curves given in Figure 6.15 show, the central dough temperatures will higher at any given time during the initial freezing. In the storage period which immediately follows blast freezing, the dough pieces typically undergo a further cooling period. The length of that {{page:168}} Table 6.3 Equalization times Centre temperature COC) Time taken (h) for centre to reach storage temperature o 5 o 11 -10 1.5 o -20 1.75 period depends in part on the particular storage temperature being used as shown from examples given in Table 6.3. Changes in frozen dough performance occur with increasing storage time, the most obvious of which are lengthening of proof time (Figure 6.8) and a progressive loss of product volume (Figure 6.9). Even when stored at -20°C (-4°F), frozen dough pieces are able to lose water and thus for storage should be wrapped in polyethylene bags or boxes overwrapped with polyethylene before transfer to the storage freezer. Defrosting and proving Because dough is a poor conductor of heat, the patterns of temperature change that occur in dough during defrosting are similar, in reverse, to those which occur during freezing, and a series of examples are compared in Figure 6.16. As with the freezing process there will be a temperature differential between the surface and centre of the dough piece during defrosting. In Figure 6.17 the temperature profile of a defrosted dough piece is compared with that typically observed in a scratch dough during proof. The curves show clearly the large temperature differential which exists between the surface and the centre of the defrosted dough. While the surface temperature after 50 min proof at 43°C (110°F) was only slightly lower than that of the scratch dough, the centre temperature was 25°C (45°F) lower. At the end of proof both dough pieces had the same volumes in the pan, but the bread baked from the frozen dough was the smaller of the two with a ragged crust break and a much denser crumb structure at the centre of the loaf. Temperature differentials such as the one illustrated in Figure 6.17 can be minimized by gradual defrosting at more modest temperatures and under controlled conditions similar to those discussed in the section on retarding. Indeed retarder-provers offer a suitable means by which to raise gradually the temperature of the dough pieces and to minimize the temperature differential within them. However, standard retarders are designed only to cool dough and will be inadequate for defrosting when completely filled with frozen dough unless they incorporate provision for heating. {{page:169}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING 20 Dough piece weight (g) 0 60 120 0 t::. 240 • 460 • 910 10 Figure 6.16 Changes of dough pIece centre temperature With defrostmg time at 21 'c (70'F) o Fresh dough o Defrosted dough - -Surface temp. 640 -- Centre tem~ ,,~ o ~ -0 . I 21°C ,43°C I O+---r-~--;---r-~--~ o 20 40 60 0 20 40 60 Recovery time (min) Proof time (min) Figure 6.17 Changes m dough temperature dunng recovery and proof Freezing proved doughs It is possible to freeze doughs which have undergone a period of proof but these products will behave quite differently from unproved frozen dough during freezing, storage and baking. In proved dough pieces the yeast will have been fully activated and is more susceptible to damage. Large numbers of yeast cells will die during the initial freezing and more will die during the frozen storage period. It is likely that in a short time, probably only a few days, that there will be no {{page:170}} viable yeast cells left in the dough. In such circumstances the dough will have a reduced ability to expand during the early stages of subsequent baking because no 'extra' carbon dioxide gas will be generated from yeast fermentation, such as would be seen in scratch or other frozen doughs. Any expansion of the dough during baking will come from the thermal expansion of gases trapped in the dough, supplemented by water vapour. In all proved dough pieces the gas mixture comprises a mixture of nitrogen bubbles which provide the nuclei for carbon dioxide generated by the yeast. Any oxygen originally incorporated into the dough will have been rapidly used by the yeast during or immediately after mixing. The potential expansion of the dough during proof and the early stages of baking thus depends on these gases being retained within the dough matrix. At the warm temperatures experienced during proof, carbon dioxide is constantly being generated by yeast fermentation, going into solution and diffusing into nitrogen gas bubbles. When the dough is cooled, the diffusion process is reversed because of the high solubility of carbon dioxide at low temperatures compared with that of nitrogen (Sluimer, 1981). Without the inflating effect of the carbon dioxide gas the nitrogen bubbles shrink in size; some may become so small that they cease to exist and the nitrogen gas from them diffuses out of the system. In frozen proved doughs this diffusion process manifests itself as a collapse of the dough structure. During storage this collapse or shrinking continues, and with no yeast activity available at bake-off there is insufficient compensatory increase in gas expansion. In addition, the nitrogen bubbles which remain in the dough are those which had a larger bubble size, and the resulting bread is very open. Amongst the more successful of frozen proved products are those which contain yeast and which are laminated, e.g. croissant and Danish. In such products the final quality depends more on the ability of water vapour to force apart the dough layers during baking than on the generation of carbon dioxide from yeast. The vapour-resistant properties of the dough layers depend to a large extent on the integrity of the dough layers and the physical properties of the fat (Cauvain, 1995). When frozen proved laminated products are transferred to the oven they still have the potential to expand and yield products of 'normal' appearance. Factors affecting the formation of white spots on retarded and frozen doughs Perhaps the most common of the quality losses associated with retarded and frozen doughs are the very small, translucent blisters or 'white spots' which sometimes occur on the top and bottom crusts of the baked product. They are not usually seen on the surface of the dough piece at any of the stages before baking, but very quickly become visible as the crust begins to colour. Observations of cross-sections of suitable dough surfaces under a light microscope confmn their presence. {{page:171}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING The mechanism by which these white spots are formed still remains to be fully elucidated, but it is clear from research that any change which affects the production of carbon dioxide gas during the retarding or defrosting phases will influence their formation. The occurrence of white spots is associated with significant gas production before or during retarding. They are more likely to occur with high yeast levels, high storage temperatures, long storage times and even very slow defrosting in the case of frozen doughs. This evidence suggests that the significant factor in their formation is the high solubility of carbon dioxide gas discussed above. It is interesting to note that dough pieces which skin during the retarding phase do not normally exhibit white spots, which implies that high moisture content at the surface of the dough favours their formation. Some additional evidence for this view is provided when the bases of some retarded products, such as rolls, are examined. They show a similar formation of white spots, although their drier upper surface may exhibit skinning. The base surface of the dough is protected from the drying effects of the retarder atmosphere or air movement because of its intimate contact with the metal sheet or paper surface on which it stands. Pan bread can exhibit white spot formation on the upper crust and also a similar phenomenon on the side crusts. In the latter case the white spots appear to combine and form into patches having a 'waxy' appearance, which are sometimes referred to as 'condensation spotting' (Sluimer, 1978). Once again, the white spots seem to form most readily where the dough surface is protected from moisture loss, in this case by the sides of the pan. This apparent relationship between white spot formation and higher moisture content may also help us to understand why the spots are translucent and contrast so readily with the darker crust areas. Under the microscope there is some evidence of water droplets suspended within the voids, which become white spots. This 'extra' water may act as a diluent for the colour-forming components within the dough, quite literally reducing the local concentration of sugars. The white cast that is observed when dough pieces skin occurs for quite different reasons. Here it is likely that the loss of moisture significantly reduces the Maillard browning reactions which normally occur. It has been observed that the appearance of white spots is also related to the gas-retaining ability of the dough. White spots may occur when the dough has poor gas retention, and white spots are more likely to occur even when the retarding temperature and yeast level have been optimized. Because such a wide range of factors affect their formation it is difficult to predict their appearance with certainty. Reductions in recipe yeast levels together with lower retarding temperatures are often the most effective means of eliminating or reducing the incidence of white spots. Other changes which may be beneficial include reducing the periods of bulk fermentation after mixing and minimizing delays after final moulding before transfer to the retarder or freezer. Traditional remedies for eliminating white spots have been to increase the degree of dough 'enrichment', usually {{page:172}} sugar, fat or both. Sugar slows down (retards) yeast activity while increasing fat levels contribute to improved gas retention in the dough. Not all process changes affecting the formation of white spots occur during the retarding phase. There is evidence that white spots are more likely to occur if the rate of warming of dough pieces after retarding is particularly low as a result of using a very cool prooftemperature (e.g. 12°C, 54°P) or very low yeast levels (e.g. 1 % of flour weight) or both. Supporting evidence was seen in work on frozen dough where a study of the defrosting technique needed for frozen Vienna bread doughs showed that relatively rapid defrosting at 21°C (700P) did not give white spots while slow defrosting via a retarder at 3°C (38°P) did (Cauvain, 1983). Causes of quality losses with retarded and frozen doughs Variations in the quality of products made from retarded and frozen doughs may occur from time to time. There are many causes of such quality losses. Some arise from factors which have their origins in the dough formulation and processing conditions which are used before the doughs enter the retarder or deep freeze, while others arise directly from conditions within the refrigeration equipment or as the result of thawing and proving conditions. Identifying the causes of quality losses requires careful consideration of the whole process. A few possible causes of quality losses are given below, but the list is by no means exhaustive. Skinning Low humidity or excessive air movement, even with sufficient humidity, may cause the surface of the dough piece to dry out or 'skin' during retarding or recovery (Cauvain, 1992). The upper crust will be hard and dry eating. If skinning occurs during retarding there will be a distinct tendency for the dough pieces to lean towards the air inlet. Skinning becomes more pronounced as the storage time increases. It is an irreversible phenomenon and will carry through to the baked products, which may be small in volume and have a 'pinched' appearance as the result of uneven expansion of the dough pieces during baking. Lowering the retarding temperature or the yeast level in the recipe, or both, reduce skinning. Crust fissures Products may sometimes exhibit small fissures or cracks, mainly on the upper crust. The depth of cracking may become significant on occasions. The cracks may be observed on the surface of the dough, and once formed will persist through to the baked product. Slow freezing, such as that encountered in retarder-provers, or excessively high yeast levels are the main causes. Such {{page:173}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING cracks are more prevalent with dough pieces of large radius. They can be minimized by lowering the yeast level used in the recipe. Ragged crust breaks These occur most often when there is a large temperature differential between the centre of the dough piece and its surface. It can be a particular problem with frozen doughs of larger size where the poor conductivity of dough exaggerates the temperature differentials. When the dough piece enters the oven the full gassing potential of the dough centre is not realized until after the crust has set and the crust breaks at its weakest points. Generally this will be in the normal crust break area, although it may occur in other places. The only remedy is to give a longer proof using lower temperatures or lower yeast levels, or both. Small volume There is seldom a single cause of small-volume products and usually the problem is linked with other quality losses, such as skinning or ragged crust breaks. Improvements in volume may be achieved by reducing the length of time in storage (both retarded and frozen), optimizing yeast levels, and optimizing retarding and proof temperatures. In the case of frozen doughs, volume losses occur through the loss of activity and the release of proteolytic enzymes and glutathione from disrupted yeast cells. White spots or small blisters The origins of the white spots or small blisters on products baked from retarded or frozen doughs have been discussed above. In summary they have their origins in almost any change which affects gas production or retention. They can be eliminated or reduced by lowering yeast levels in the retarded dough recipe, adding fat where it will not adversely affect other product qualities, reducing bulk fermentation (floortime) after mixing, and reducing delays before retarding and freezing. Lowering the retarding temperature or the yeast level in the recipe, or both, will eliminate white spots on the top crust and, to a lesser extent, the bottom. Solving a white spot problem in frozen doughs by adjustment of the yeast level is more difficult because of the need to maintain gassing activity in the dough after defrosting. Minimizing gassing of doughs before freezing is a better option, although using lower dough temperatures to achieve this may result in other problems. Waxy patches Patches of uneven colour on the side and bottom crusts of breads baked in pans. They have a shiny or 'waxy' appearance and are frequently observed on the {{page:174}} lower comers of the loaves. This phenomenon is sometimes referred to as 'condensation spotting' and its incidence increases as storage time increases, even when the retarding temperature and yeast level have been optimized. The only remedy to this problem is to avoid storing dough pieces in pans at refrigerated temperatures for more than 36 h. Black spots An unusual problem sometimes seen on the bottom of baked products is the occurrence of black spots, often mistaken for mould formation. This phenomenon arises from a reaction between the moist dough and steel baking sheets and can even occur through silicone paper. It is easily overcome by switching to anodized aluminium trays. Large blisters Large blisters sometimes occur on products. They are of two sorts: either they protrude from the surface causing a distortion of shape or they appear as a large cavity under the top crust which only becomes apparent when the product is cut. The most common causes are poor moulding and damage to the dough piece during processing which may cause large gas bubbles trapped within the dough piece to become greatly expanded by the carbon dioxide gas released during the proof phase. Poor gas retention will also contribute to this problem, and it will be exacerbated by a short final proof, either as a consequence of using too high a yeast level or too high a proof temperature. Delays in transferring dough from the blast freezer to deep-freezer storage can lead to partial defrosting. Upon subsequent baking large blisters may be present under the top crust. Dark crust colour Enzymic action can continue in retarded doughs, and to a lesser extent with frozen doughs. Alpha-amylase activity is the main activity of concern under this heading as it can produce an increase in available maltose and dextrins, which can contribute to excessive darkening of product crust on baking. Excessively dark crust colours can be avoided by lowering the retarding temperature to reduce enzymic activity, or by reducing the level of added sugars, skimmed milk powder, malt flour or added fungal alpha-amylase. Uneven or open cell structure Sometimes doughs which normally produce a fine cell structure yield a more open one when retarded or frozen. More often than not, the origins lie in excessive gas production before the dough is chilled or frozen, or in the early stages of the retarding and freezing processes. The poor conductivity of dough, exacerbated with larger dough pieces can make a significant contribution to the {{page:175}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING problem. There are a number of possible remedies which include lowering the retarding temperature and reducing delays before retarding or freezing. Controlling cell structure by manipulating the yeast level in retarded doughs presents some problems. To maintain a fine cell structure in retarded products it is necessary to lower the yeast level in order to minimize gas production during the retarding phase. However, lowering the yeast level requires a compensatory increase in proof time in order to maintain product volume, and excessively long proof times can also lead to more open cell structures. With frozen doughs the problem is potentially greater as yeast levels which are higher than normal may be used in order to avoid long proof times. In this case the best option is to keep the processing time between mixer and freezer as short as possible. Areas of dense crumb This phenomenon may often be associated with ragged crust breaks. Uneven expansion of the dough piece during proof and the early stages of baking is the main cause, such as might be experienced by transferring cold doughs to a hot prover. There is a tendency for this phenomenon to manifest itself more readily as the storage time of frozen doughs increases. Principles of refrigeration In order to a cool a product we must have some means of extracting heat from it. For a solid to become a liquid or for a liquid to change to a vapour, it must absorb a large quantity of heat. The heat involved in the transition processes is referred to as 'latent heat'. If we can find some means of using doughs to provide the necessary heat, we have the basis of a rudimentary refrigeration system. Large quantities of heat are also involved when a vapour changes back into a liquid and then into a solid, but in this case the heat is given out by the material instead of being absorbed. The transition from liquid to vapour and vice versa forms an essential part of the refrigeration cycle which is used in retarding and deep freezing. In its simplest terms, a refrigeration system has an evaporator coil sited inside a cabinet and a compressor and condenser coil sited outside. All three components are connected and a pump circulates a liquid refrigerant between them. The refrigeration cycle is founded on four basic steps: 1. a reduction in atmospheric pressure on a liquid reduces its boiling point and increases its vaporization rate; 2. the change from liquid to vapour requires latent heat of vaporization; 3. increasing the pressure of a vapour increases its rate of condensation and the temperature at which it changes to a liquid; 4. latent heat of vaporization is given out in the change from vapour to liquid. {{page:176}} In our simple refrigeration system, liquid refrigerant is metered into an evaporator where it is vaporized under reduced pressure (step 1). The liquid cools as latent heat of vaporization is absorbed (step 2) and in tum cools the coils through which it is being pumped. The cooling coils have fins attached which considerably increase the potential cooling area of the coil and since the coil is located within a chamber (e.g. retarder), the surrounding air is cooled and in tum any doughs contained within the cabinet. The efficiency of the air in cooling the product is improved by circulating the air by means of a fan. The vapour thus created in the evaporator coil passes to a compressor where the pressure is increased (step 3) and the latent heat is given up (step 4) to the atmosphere. Fins are also used in this part of the cycle to increase the efficiency of the condenser coil and rapidly pass the heat to the atmosphere. Modem refrigeration equipment still uses the basic principles described above, but there have been many improvements in design and operating efficiency. There has been considerable change in the nature of the refrigerants which are used together with improvements in knowledge about their operating efficiency and impact on the environment. In designing a suitable retarder or deep freeze the refrigeration engineer uses information on equipment loading, the specific heat capacity of the products and the materials used in the cabinet or room construction, and other less precise information on ambient operating conditions and the rate at which products will typically give up their heat. However, refrigeration is not a precise science, and while there have been many improvements in equipment design, the behaviour of fermented dough products during cooling still remains difficult to model accurately. Retarder-provers and retarders The design of retarder-provers varies but most incorporate the basic elements illustrated in Figure 6.18. They can be programmed to follow a preset sequence of operations at given times. Initially the equipment is set in the retarding (cold) phase and remains so until, at a preset time, it changes to the heating sequence. The unit continues in the proving (warm) phase until it is switched back automatically to retarding. This cycle of events can be programmed in advance for 7 days or longer. In the retarding phase, warm air drawn from the cabinet passes over the refrigerating coils and is cooled. In smaller models a perforated metal screen in the cabinet ensures that the cool air is distributed evenly over the warm dough pieces. The air is recirculated over the refrigerating coils and the cooling process continues until the temperature of the air and the dough pieces reaches that set on the thermostat. The surface area of the refrigerating coils is made as large as possible to ensure rapid cooling and to help in maintaining a high relative humidity in the cabinet during the retarding phase. Initially the air in the cabinet is relatively {{page:177}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING Heating ll. elements I ! [ Control panel Wate bath ~ • ~~and h~ater fitted in front • Fan • t , t Perforated screen " , .. " , .. , .. Rack " .. .. .. t , .. " Insulation '. , .. , t .. , " , " +- t " , , ,. +- t +- +- .. t .. Figure 6.18 Representation of retarder-prover construction. {{page:178}} dry, but the dough pieces gradually lose moisture and the relative humidity of the air increases. As the temperature of the surface of the refrigerating coils is close to, or below, O°C (32°P), some of the water present in the air forms as ice on the coils and the relative humidity of the air falls. In order to maintain relative humidity at equilibrium, the products then lose more moisture. As the operating temperature of a retarder-prover is reduced, the saturated vapour pressure of the air becomes lower and, therefore, a smaller mass of water is required to achieve a given relative humidity. This lower moisture requirement for the air results in a smaller weight loss from the dough pieces. However, operating at temperatures below O°C increases ice formation on the coils and at other locations in the retarder-prover, with the result that the efficiency of the evaporating coils is impaired. Provided that the efficiency of the evaporator coil in keeping the cabinet at the desired temperature is not too badly affected, ice formation is of no great consequence. Indeed, when the retarder-prover changes to recovery and proof conditions, the melting ice can provide some of the water vapour necessary for proving conditions. In such cases the equipment must provide sufficient energy to overcome the latent heat of fusion of ice, as well as for warming the products. Many retarder-provers include an independent defrosting cycle to keep the coils free from ice, and the water vapour produced helps to reduce the moisture lost from the dough pieces. However, it is important that the temperature rise within the cabinet during this defrosting period is limited, otherwise this will impair product quality. At the end of the predetermined storage time the operation of the cooling coils ceases and the heating cycle commences. In general, retarder-provers are equipped with several different warming steps, the aim of which is to raise gradually the temperature of the unit and the dough pieces and to hold the latter until they are ready for baking. Humidity will be controlled during the proving phase to prevent skinning of the dough pieces. In construction, retarders follow much the same lines as those described above with retarder-provers, except that they do not have proving facilities fitted. Retarders more commonly operate within the temperature range 2-4°C (36-39°P) and should be able to maintain a relative humidity of about 85% but some are capable of operating at temperatures as low as -SoC (23°P). References Baguena, R., Soriano, M.D., Martinez-Anaya, M.A. and Benedito de Barbre, C. (1991) Viability and perfonnance of pure yeast strains in frozen wheat dough. Journal of Food Science, 56(6), 1690-4, 1698. Bruinsma, B.L. and Giesenschlag, J. (1984) Frozen dough perfonnance. Compressed yeast - instant dry yeast. Bakers' Digest, 58(6), 6--7, 11. Casey, G.P. and Foy, J.J. (1995) Yeast perfonnance in frozen doughs and strategies for improvement, in Frozen Doughs and Batters (eds K. Kulp, K. Lorenz and J. Brummer), AACC, St Paul, Minnesota, USA, pp. 19-52. {{page:179}} DOUGH RETARDING AND FREEZING Cauvam, S P (1979) Frozen bread dough FMBRA Report No 84, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK Cauvam, S P (1983) Making more from frozen dough, m Proceedings of the 56th Conference of the BritIsh SOCIety of Baking, March, pp 5-10 Cauvam, S P (1986) Producmg fresh pizza bases FMBRA Bulletin No 3, June, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK, 126-32 Cauvam, S P (1992) Retardmg Bakers' ReVIew, March, 22-3 Cauvam, S P (1995) Puttmg pastry under the rmcroscope Baking Industry Europe, 68-9 DubOIS, D K and Blockcolsky, D (1986) Frozen bread dough Effect of dough rmxmg thawmg methods AlB Technical Bulletin Vol VIII, No 6 Amencan Institute of Baking, Manhattan, KS Godkin, W J and Cathcart, W H (1949) FennentatlOn activity and survival of yeast m frozen fennented and unfennented doughs Food Technology, 3, Apnl, 139 Hmo, A , Taken, H and Tanaka, Y (1987) New freeze-tolerant yeast for frozen dough preparations Cereal ChemIstry, 64(4), 269-75 Hsu, K , Hoseney, R C and Selb, P A (1979) Frozen dough II Effects of freezmg and stonng conditions on the stablhty of frozen doughs Cereal ChemIstry, 68, 423-8 Klme, L and Sugihara, T F (1968) Factors affectmg the stablilty of frozen bread doughs Bakers Digest, 42, October, 44-6, 48-50 Mazur, P (1970) CryobIOlogy The freezmg of bIOlogical systems SCience, 168,939-49 Memtt, P P (1960) The effect of preparation on the stablhty and performance of frozen, unbaked, yeast-leavened doughs Bakers' DIgest, 34, August, 57-8 Neyreneuf, 0 and Van der Plaat, J B (1991) PreparatIOn of frozen French bread dough with Improved stablhty Cereal Chemistry, 68, 60-6 Simmer, P (1978) An explanatIOn of some tYPical phenomena occumng dunng retardmg Bakkerswereld, 19, January, 14-16 Simmer, P (1981) PnnClples of dough retardmg Bakers' Digest, 55, August, 6-8, 10 Spooner, T F (1990) Hot prospects from frozen dough Baking Snack Systems, 12( II), 18-22 {{page:197}}
