---
book: "Technology of Breadmaking"
book_slug: "cauvain-technology-of-breadmaking"
author: "Stanley P. Cauvain & Linda S. Young"
lang: "en"
relevance: "core"
chapter: "Chapter 7: Application of knowledge-based systems"
heading: "Chapter 7: Application of knowledge-based systems"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 7: Application of knowledge-based systems"]
order: 7
source_page: 197
tokens_est: 8578
---

# Chapter 7: Application of knowledge-based systems

{{page:197}} LINDA S. YOUNG Introduction In the baking industry the use of computers and their systems has until recently been confined to the in-line control mechanisms built into equipment and for the administrative functioning of the bakery. The use of PLC (programmable logic cards) to ensure that the equipment performs as required is widespread. For example PLCs are used in mixing machines to ensure that the ingredients are mixed at the correct speed for the requisite time period or, in the case of ovens, that each zone has the desired temperature and humidity profile. There is much software, for example spreadsheets, word processing and database packages, to assist the baker, large or small to perform the business function and to ensure the smooth running of materials requisition, stock control, accounting, production scheduling and communicating with the customer. There is also another area where computer technology can be used by the baker. This is for assistance with the technology of the product. Achieving quality products consistently, whether new or existing ones, must be the goal of any baker wanting to remain in or improve the business. Computer programs which advise on recipe formulation, on optimal equipment operation and assist in perfecting a faulty or substandard product can be useful tools to the bakery technologist in all aspects of product development, maintenance and production. They can help the baker to understand and apply the underlying technology of the products and their quality for existing or new products. They can assist bakers to meet their goals more effectively. However, such programs cannot be developed unless the knowledge exists about the technology of the product and is made available. Embedding knowledge into a computer requires a different approach from that used for the development of spreadsheets and databases. The systems used are called 'knowledge-based' or 'expert' systems. It is useful to give some definitions: • An expert system is a computer program that seeks to model the expertise of a human expert within a specific domain; • A knowledge-based system embodies heuristic knowledge (rules-of-thumb, best guess, etc.) captured from intelligent sources. For this chapter I shall use the term 'knowledge-based systems' or 'KBS' to include both of these definitions as in reality the terms are used interchangeably. © Thomson Science 1998 {{page:181}} APPLICATION OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS It is easier to consider how KBSs differ from data and information processing, using an example as follows. If a baker has a recipe with ingredients and quantities then using a data processing program the cost of the recipe can be determined simply by multiplying the unit quantity cost by the quantity of an ingredient and then summing all the costs of all the individual ingredients. Each time a new recipe is input the calculations can be done and the route or set of logic/numeric equations executed by the program is the same. If the baker then follows a recipe and processing method, say for pan bread, and finds that the product is faulty or below specification, then in order to obtain some advice for corrective actions the computer program that the baker uses must contain some rules and facts about the ingredients, the processing and the combination and interactions between them. When another recipe, perhaps for rolls instead of pan bread, is input to the program, the path and sets of rules are different. The route through such a program can take many paths. Each path is determined from information given and decisions made by the user and the knowledge contained and defined within the system. An explanation of the reasons behind the conclusions reached by the program and corrective action for rectifying the problem can be given to the baker. In order to develop programs which can deal with the technology of the product, that knowledge must be available and be found. The integrity and validity of the knowledge must be sound. There are different sources from which the knowledge can be gathered. First, there is knowledge in the form of the written word together with the numerical data to support it. Second, there are the human sources - the experts. For example the methods which are typically used to assess bread characters have been described in Chapter 1 but assessment of bread quality, whether subjective or objective, has no value unless the user has the ability to change bread character in a particular way. Traditionally this is a role for an 'expert'. Experts are hard to find and when they are found the very fact that they are recognized as experts means that they are busy people. Currently experts who thoroughly understand the technology of breadmaking and can apply their knowledge of breadmaking are in limited supply. Without them KBSs for the fermented products industry cannot be developed. The knowledge, once captured and structured into a KBS program, can be used by technologists with different levels of skills. Whether used by an expert or novice, the KBS never forgets or becomes tired, and the advice or information returned to the user is consistent. From that information, users can learn and expand their own knowledge of the baking technology concerned. The areas where KBSs have been most successful in the baking industry have been in advisory and fault diagnostic systems. The first important criteria is that the 'domains' or subject areas must be well defined before such a system is developed. Attempting to produce in one system a tool which covers the whole of a subject area is a mammoth task and will probably be doomed to failure. It is better to take a domain and split that domain, say bread technology, into manageable chunks. These chunks can be linked together to form the larger {{page:182}} picture. The second important criterion when developing such systems is that the knowledge should exist and be sound. Where experts are used to provide the knowledge input and where there may be conflict between experts in the knowledge given then care must be taken in sorting the 'fact' from the 'opinion'. In many instances there may be a case for performing further work to determine the facts to support the existing knowledge. Like spreadsheets and databases, software packages can be purchased into which the knowledge can be bolted. These packages and languages e.g. Kappa PC and Prolog, provide the mechanism by which the knowledge is employed. The knowledge is structured into the package and the user interface or dialogue is designed to make the querying of that knowledge easy and meaningful to the user. Examples of systems for use in bread technology The thrust in developing KBS in the bread field has come from the Cereals and Cereal Processing Division of the Campden and Chorleywood Food Research Association (CCFRA). This division continued the cereals-based technological function of the Flour Milling and Baking Research Association (FMBRA) when it merged with Campden Food and Drink Research Association in 1995. Aspects of the accumulated knowledge in bread technology which spanned 40 years were available for use in the development of the two systems described in this chapter - a bread faults expert system and a retarding advisor. The criteria required, that of sound knowledge and defined domain bounds, were met and both systems are in use in the industry helping bakery technologists provide quality products for their customers and so will serve as examples to help readers understand how KBSs can be applied. Bread Faults Expert System This system (Young, 1991) is intended for use with white pan breads made using the Chorleywood Bread Process (Chapter 2). Its original research objective was to determine whether the knowledge-based systems area of computing science could be applied for the benefit of the baking industry. The potential for such systems was soon realized and the objective was extended to produce a commercially available computer program for the industry. The knowledge of faults was underpinned with baking trials and the manifestations of the faults were recorded photographically. These photographs were included in a manual which accompanied the system. When this system was developed in 1989, the expense of including these images in the system would have been prohibitive, although in later systems developed for other areas in the baking industry such images have been included electronically and are available to the user at the touch of the keyboard. An example of the latter is FAULT DoC, a computerbased system for the diagnosis of cake faults (Petryszak et al., 1995). {{page:183}} APPLICATION OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS Initially a survey was undertaken of the most common faults in bread production. It became obvious that covering all bread varieties made by the CBP was ambitious, and so at that time attention was concentrated on the area of knowledge relating to faults in white pan breads (about 50% of the market), which would be a manageable in-depth domain and would provide a useful diagnostic tool for the industry. Consulting the system. With the faulty loaf to hand the user describes its appearance to the system (Figure 7.1). If details of the recipe and processing conditions are known, then these too can be input. Comment screens are displayed giving additional information relevant to the diagnosis. A diagnosis is subsequently offered to the user with causes ranked in order of certainty. The major causes of faults, such as under- or overoxidation, under- or overproof, ingredient faults, e.g. incorrect fat, and processing faults, e.g. 'bumpy transfer of loaves from prover to oven' are all investigated. The first area to be described is the shape. Here the user is shown a screen detailing all of the shape faults known to the system (Figure 7.2). For example, the shape faults about which it asks are keyholing, concaving, overhanging top, FAULT AREA Where is the fault? • shape y • surface y • crumb y Please type y for the appropriate faults Figure 7.1 Example of the Fault area screen. SHAPE FAULTS Please indicate which shape faults the loaf has. Type y for yes; n for no • keyhole n • concave sides/top/base y • overhanging top n • sloping top n • flying top n • top break along/across top crust n • protruding heel on bottom crust n • low shoulders y • creased top/base or irreg base n press Fl for Help Figure 7.2 Example of a completed Shape Faults identification screen. {{page:184}} sloping top, flying top, top breaks, low shoulders, etc. Text descriptions about the shape characteristics are available by selection of the 'FI' key and can be called up when required by the user (Figure 7.3). Photographs of the faults are illustrated in the manual (Figure 7.4). The characteristics which describe the shape of the loaf are selected. If further information relevant to the description selected is required, then the system will ask questions relevant to that descriptor. For example, if the loaf exhibits blisters or bubbles, information about their size and walls is required (Figure 7.5). Similarly, the areas of loaf crust and crumb (interior) are described to the system. For crust it asks about blisterslbubbles, tears, pocks, wrinkles, etc. and for the inside crumb there are questions about crumb cell walls and structure. If holes exist, there are screens related to the shape, size and position of the hole. As the descriptions are given and further questions are asked by the system, and as the knowledge base is explored in order to determine the cause(s) of the fault(s), comment screens (Figure 7.6) are fed back to the user giving additional information about possible causes of the fault. The more information about the fault that can be given to the system, so the more accurate the ultimate diagnosis can be. If conflicting pieces of information are given the system will tell the user and ask for some information to be resubmitted. In order to obtain as complete a diagnosis as possible there are sections asking for details of the recipe and the processing which the loaf underwent. In both of these areas the default values are displayed as reference points for the user (FIgure 7.7). During information gathering the system builds a list of possible causes. Once the dialogue of questions and answers is complete, the system further considers SURFACE FAULTS 1 Bllsters/Bubbles These are ralsed areas usually bllster shaped In the top crust They are sometlmes paper thln and look llke bubblegum 2 Tears/Pocks These appear In the sldes of the loaf The sldes no longer look smooth and contlnuous but are blemlshed wlth lndentatlons 3 Scorches These are dark reddlsh brown marks on the bottom, sldes or ends of the loaf 4 Patches These usually appear on the sldes or ends of the loaf and are off-whlte In colour. S Wrlnkles These appear anywhere on the sldes and ends of the loaf They are slmllar to the folds and wrlnkles on the palm of a hand 6 Top Crust colour The top crust colour lS darker or llghter than normal press any key to contlnue Figure 7.3 Example of a 'Help' screen showmg descnptIOns of Surface Faults {{page:185}} APPLICATION OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS BREAD FAULTS eXPERT SYSTEM Overhangmg top The top crmt overhang,> the '>Ide and/or end Clust, l __ f 29 Figure 7.4 Example of a page from the manual each of the causes on its list and tries to ascertain a certainty ranking. Where an additional piece of information might make one part of the diagnosis more certain than another, then the relevant information is sought from the user. Finally each of the possible causes is displayed together with its likelihood (Figure 7.8). If a cau<;e wa<; <;uspected but found not to have enough supporting eVIdence for a conclusive diagnosis, then this is related to the user. With the possible causes {{page:186}} BLISTER SIZE What is the size of the blister/bubble? • large • small BLISTER WALLS How would you describe the walls of the blister/bubble ? thick • • thin • undecided Figure 7.5 Examples of addItIOnal mfonnatlOn gIven COMMENT Low shoulders with low volume can indicate a failure to meet the fat requirements of the dough. It may be possible that the composite improver has been omitted. Figure 7.6 Example of a 'Comment' screen given, users can then, with knowledge of their own bakery environment and conditions, check out the suggestions made by the system. Further consideration of the faulty or substandard product might lead the user to give different answers to some of the questions posed by the system. The user can return to any of the three fault areas to change the description given (Figure 7.9) and can see whether the diagnosis is more certain or changed in the light of the different description. Corrective actions need to be made in the knowledge of the bakery's own operating conditions. To help in this process the system displays the areas to be checked for each of the major causes of faults. Any diagnostic system stands or falls by the accuracy and consistency of the information given to it. In this respect the manual provides a useful reference tool for novice users who may not be familiar with terms and descriptions commonly used. {{page:187}} APPLICATION OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS FAT SLIP POINT What is the slip point of the fat? °c slip point 0.00 If unknown leave as 0 °c and press enter. A value of 46°C will be assumed NORMAL PROCESSING CONDITIONS MIXING Work input 8-11 Wh/kg Time 2-4 mins 26-32 °c Temp (after) Were your mixing conditions within these ranges? • y Figure 7.7 Examples of screens from the recipe and processing sections. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Cause L~kelihood OVER-OXIDATION Moderately likely CEREAL ALPHA AMYLASE Slightly likely Using the Fl key you may display a list of areas to be cheCked relevant to each suspected fault OTHERWISE press any key to continue. press any key to contin~ Figure 7.8 Example of a diagnosis summary. This KBS system gives an objective diagnosis of bread, either faulty or below standard, made using the CBP. It questions consistently and never overlooks any aspect of a faulty loaf. By describing the characteristics of the loaf which the user sees as lacking the required quality, the system can suggest, with its diagnosis and feedback screens, areas for attention in the {{page:188}} " END OF CONSULTATION II You may now: 1. change an answer in loaf SHAPE • 2. change an answer in loaf SURFACE • 3. change an answer in loaf CRUMB • 4. begin a new consultation • 5. quit • Only additional findings as a result of the changed plus the old data will be reported. Select using the cursor keys then press enter when choice is made. Figure 7.9 'End of Consultation' screen. ingredients or processing conditions which might result in a product of better quality. It can be used not only by the inexperienced but also by the expert to prompt investigation into areas of a diagnosis which at first might not have been considered, but which in fact could have contributed to the faulty loaf. The system never tires or forgets the rules it has to apply and can provide the user with ideas to be explored to achieve either the loaf quality or characteristics. The expertise built up in bread fault diagnosis is now archived in a useful computer tool. As the knowledge develops and is expanded and validated through research, so such systems can be updated to include the new advances. Whilst the system was originally developed as a diagnostic aid, it does have use in a broad sense in a training environment. It is possible to use it to predict which fault might occur by describing only the volume, recipe and processing conditions whilst omitting to describe any of the loaf characteristics. This approach will be treated as if the system was 'diagnosing' but in fact with no description of the loaf itself it becomes a prediction. Retarding Advisor The second system (Young and Cauvain, 1994) to be described in this chapter was developed for the retarding field. It was developed four years after the bread system and in that time great leaps forward had been made in computing equipment, in its availability (desktop personal computers), capability and speed, together with a realistic setting of price, making the technology accessible to many more companies and users. The technology required in order to link the PC to a particular piece of equipment was easier, and was tried and tested. {{page:189}} APPLICATION OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS The Retarding Advisor enables a baker to achieve acceptable and consistent product quality when using a batch process with a mix of product configurations, for example French sticks, rolls and pan breads. It encompasses the types of information on the interaction between product, recipe and process conditions as described in Chapter 6. It advises the baker on the appropriate settings required for the retarding equipment according to the mix of products to be made in the batch. It determines the start and stop times for both the cold (retarding) and warm (proof) phases of the process. Manufacturers have developed retarding equipment which combines the ability to control both the cold and warm phases and the timings involved in the sequential change from cold to warm as discussed in Chapter 6. Usually these changes are preset by 'programmes' built into the electronics of the equipment. The variation in the mix of products within the batch is not considered. Consequently bakers have to choose the most appropriate programme to suit their needs, often from a position of lacking knowledge of the rules which govern the production of retarded products. Sometimes the equipment is inflexible and limits the baker's ability to produce the quality of product sought. The system has particular relevance not only to bakeries which use retarding equipment but also to equipment manufacturers and ingredients suppliers, whose understanding of the principles of retarding might be less deep than that of bakers. RETARDING ADVISOR FMBRA FMBRA o o Fault Dlagnosls AdvHor Fast Track AdvlS0r Fault Trall What-lf General lnfo/Glossary II Qult Use cursor keys to select route (or help screen ?) then press [Enter] Figure 7.10 Retardmg AdVisor screen showmg five modules {{page:190}} The system consists of five modules linked together to form the Advisor (Figure 7.10): • Advisor Module; • What-if Module; • Fault Diagnosis - Fast Track Module; • Fault Diagnosis - Fault Trail Module; • Glossary/Help Module. Each module has a different function and can be entered individually or sequentially to meet the user's needs. For example, an in-store bakery might want to determine the operational settings for a mix of fermented products to be retarded over a weekend. The service engineer of a retarder manufacturing company might want to use the system to determine what has caused the faulty products that the baker is encountering in order to identify the area in which the equipment might be at fault. Central to the Retarding Advisor is the rule base which considers the complex relationships between the ingredients, formulations, dough process and retarding process. This is contained within the Advisor Module which provides the advised set of conditions to apply in the retarding process in order to obtain products of acceptable quality given the mix of products to be processed. The user tells the system what product mix is to be made (Figure 7.11), and gives the recipe, either retrieved from a database or input specially. Further information is given, such as how full the equipment will be (e.g. 50%), the dough temperature after mixing, whether a retard over 1, 2 or 3 days will be required (overnight, over a weekend, etc.), and the time at which the products will be required for the oven. FMBRA RETARDING ADVISOR FMBRA Use cursor keys [t,~] and press [Enter] to select II Product details! the products you wish to retard I Pan bread - 400g Pan bread - 800g Free standing bread - 400g Free standing bread - 800g I Sticks - 400g I Rolls Buns Croissants Danish Doughnuts Frozen dough - 400g and upwards Frozen dough - small units 1/ Quit II Continue Figure 7.11 Example of screen showing product mix in a batch. {{page:191}} APPLICATION OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS The system first sets up the proof (warm) phase of the operation and determines what conditions can be set for the products, given their mix and yeast levels. There can be several sets of possible conditions which will yield acceptable product quality. Advice is available to the user in choosing which set is most appropriate to the bakery environment in operation. For example, two acceptable sets of conditions are shown in Figure 7.12. From the advice about each condition, the most appropriate one for the bakery operation can be chosen. Once the user has selected the most suitable set of conditions, the system determines the various options for the retard (cold) phase of the process. Again advice is available to help the user to choose the most appropriate settings. Where no conditions can be found, the system will determine whether suitable conditions can be found if the yeast level in the recipe can be altered. At each point the user has the option to accept or reject the advice given. The settings for the equipment, including the temperatures and timings, are given for the user to apply (Figure 7.l3). In the What-if Module the user can experiment with different temperature scenarios for the mix of products and the process regime (1, 2 or 3 day retard). Here the system will check whether the temperature given with the recipe and its yeast level will yield an acceptable product(s). Where the temperature is inappropriate, the system will check, if the yeast level in the recipe is changed for the temperature in question, whether the product quality would become acceptable. It will automatically recalculate the yeast level needed. This module is invaluable for use when equipment settings and operations are less flexible. RETARDING ADVISOR FMBRA FMBRA The following 2 conditions will give an acceptable product. Proof Condtn 1 Proof Condtn 2 Proof Condtn 3 Temp = Temp= Temp= 2PC Not valid May lead to Can give better less even cell volume. More structure tolerant to processing delays. Which proof condition set do you want to use (type 1,2,3 or 4) 2 F1 for additional info or select»»»»»»11 Next II Previous II Return to options Figure 7.12 Example of screen showing acceptable sets of conditions. {{page:192}} FMBRA RETARDING ADVISOR FMBRA retard ok Current Settings proof ok Process details Time into rtdr:16.00 on 31/12/1996 Recipe details Pan bread - 400 Equpt: full Time into oven:06.00 on 01/01/1997 Days delay 1 Warm phase: 02hr 43min Salt Proof temp: 32°C 1.8% Yeast Start proof at: 03:17 hrs 2.l% Yeast wt 2.10kg on: 01/01/1997 Moisture 36.2% Retard temp: -SoC Cold phase: 0 day/s 11hr 17min Figure 7.13 Example of screen details of the cold and warm phases. The fault diagnostic modules give the opportunity of finding out what went wrong with a batch of product. The Fast Track Module addresses the need for some users, e.g. equipment service engineers, to service their customer base quickly. It provides a first line of attack to faulty product solving by comparing the settings which have been used with those that would be desirable for products in the batch. The user indicates whether the settings are inside or outside the ranges displayed for the product (Figure 7.14). The result displayed indicates where the cause of the fault may lie and gives some broad corrective actions. When a more in-depth diagnosis is required, the user can opt for the Fault Trail Module. This route can be followed after the Fast Track Module, if desired, and the information given then will be carried forward. A description is given about the faulty product (Figure 7.15) and the process conditions applied. A diagnosis and corrective actions are suggested. Whilst in some cases the fault may have had its origins outside the retarding process, the bounds of this module were kept specific to faults arising mainly from the retarding process. Reference is made however in general terms to some interactions with the generic process of fermented goods production (Figure 7.16). To cater for the diversity of user abilities in the area of the retarding process, a module, the Glossary Module, specific to the elements of the process and the terms used was implemented (Figure 7.17). This module explains the concepts applied in the system and provides transfer of the technology and education in the retarding concept. Help and explanation screens (Figure 7.18) are available to the user throughout the system and provide context-sensitive information when it is needed. {{page:193}} APPLICATION OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS FMBRA RETARDING ADVISOR FMBRA FAST TRACK I Use cursor keys and [Enter] to ~nd~cate whether the rec~pe and retard~ng cond~t~ons are 'below' or 'above' the range values d~splayed No select~on ~nd~cates 'w~th~n' range St~cks 400g - Product wh~te Range Below W~th~n Above Yeast (%flour wt) (1 0 - 4) -Yeast -Improver (1 - Improver 2 ) (1 5 - -Salt Salt 2) (0 5 - 1) -Fat Fat (25 - 32) Dough temp °c x -Dough °c +1) ( -6 - Retard~ng temp °c -Retard °C Retard~ng t~me (days) (0 5 - -Retard t~me 3) -Rec/prf °c Recovery &/or proof °c x (15 - 43) Proof hum~d~ty % -Prf humdty % (65 - 85) II QUlt II Cont~nue Figure 7.14 Example screen from the 'Fast Track' Module RETARDING ADVISOR FMBRA FMBRA FAULT TRAIL I Use cursor keys and [Enter] to select faults from l~st below then press [End] [Enter] to cont~nue to d~agnos~ Faulty product St~cks 400g - wh~te [low volume • loss of/uneven shape • exceSSlve volume • collapsed product [pale crust • open crumb structure • dark crust • uneven crumb structure Fru~ted product • surface spots • black spots on base • stalns • sh~ny/waxy/dark marks • brown rlngs round frult on sldecrust • cracks round frult • bllsters • cracks/spl~ts II More ~nfo II V~ew rec/proc II Qult II Cont~nue Figure 7.15 Example screen from the 'Fault Trail' Module The 'stand-alone' Retarding Advisor can be used to determine the most appropriate settings for the equipment, and these settings are then transferred manually to the equipment. The more important step of loading these settings directly from PC to the control panel was demonstrated with this system. The potential for usmg knowledge embodied in systems like this m order to set {{page:194}} FMBRA RETARDING ADVISOR FMBRA From the 1nformat1on glven the follow1ng d1agnos1s and act10ns are suggested underproof can cause low volume -+ 1ncrease prov1ng t1me, or temperature, or both low dough temperature can cause low volume -+ check dough temperature lS appropr1ate to the process be1ng used Press any key to cont1nue Figure 7.16 Example of screen glvmg diagnosIs and correctIve actIOns FMBRA RETARDING ADVISOR FMBRA INFO=TION L I Use cursor keys [f,~] and then press [Enter] to select GLOSSARY I the 1nformat10n/glossary sect1on~ requ1red General Informat1on Retard1ng Recovery Proof HUm1dl.ty Temperatures Frozen dough Glossary • A-C C-8 F-L L-O P-R R-S S-U v-z II Qmt Figure 7.17 Example screen from the 'Glossary' module and control equipment can be seen. Equipment set up automatically for each different batch of products and optimized to give acceptable product quality for all products in the batch is a bottom-line benefit to any bakery operation. The potential for reduction in wastage from bakery products of substandard quality is substantial. However, information can be passed not only from the PC to retarding equipment, but also can be received by the PC from that equipment and further {{page:195}} APPLICATION OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS FMBRA RETARDING ADVISOR FMBRA GENERAL INFORMATION Page 1 Retarding doughs Product quality improves with lower retarding temperatures but prolonged exposure to temperatures below -SoC should be avoided as doughs will freeze. Air temperatures below -SoC may be used to rapidly chill the retarder before and soon after products are loaded but prolonged storage below -SoC is not recommended. II Next II Previous II Return to options Figure 7.18 Example of an information screen. processed in the light of rules that apply to the equipment and the retarding technology in question. This processing can provide indications of the performance of operation of the equipment (which has long been available in isolation), and as a monitor for preventative maintenance of the equipment. This can lead to less downtime for the equipment. It can also be used for improving working practices within the bakery for the benefit of the product quality sought and the efficient operation of the bakery. Where throughputs for product are known, they can be linked to the scheduling requirements to supply quality products for a changing pattern of customer demands as is often experienced in supermarket in-store bakeries. Conclusions Knowledge-based systems are now an established computing technique which can be applied for the benefit of the baking industry. There are cases where they can be used 'solo' as diagnostic tools (e.g. the Bread Faults Expert System) or as advisors. They provide objective and supportive tools for use by an industry whose pool of expert resources has been much diminished in the last decade. They provide easy access to focused and appropriate knowledge about fermented products to an emerging generation of bakery technologists who are computer literate and at ease when using computers as tools in the workplace. Their greatest potential lies, however, with their integration with other computing environments, systems and techniques, for example with spreadsheets and databases, with on-line integration to equipment and with other {{page:196}} advanced techniques, such as neural networks and fuzzy logic, to provide a limited element of artificial intelligence. In many computing scenarios in the bakinl:; industry the processing of 'data' in an ordered pattern is no longer enough to provide the solutions to the problems facing the industry. The data has to be linked to the technology of the product and to the rules, facts and techniques, i.e. the knowledge, which determine how that data can be best applied to provide the solutions for the production. In some cases the knowledge is embodied within the system, such as when the physical link between the Retarding Advisor and the equipment was made to provide acceptable product quality in the batch operation. There are other cases where the knowledge can be called up and 'bolted in' when required. An example of this is when bakers might require advice in designing a new plant for a range of products. A search of the advertising literature, which can be found in bakery publications or in the newer electronic medium of the Internet, can yield many details about the engineering specifications of the equipment required. However, information concerning the technology of the product range and the important criteria and rules which apply to the fermented products to be made and their quality is seldom to be found. Where a user can interrogate a system in which the knowledge-based aspects applicable to the product are bolted to the data aspects applicable to the equipment the true potential for the baking industry will be seen. The next few years should be an exciting time for the development of 'knowledge tools' for the baking industry. However these tools can only be built from an understanding of the rules which govern the technology of the product and the quality required. References FAULT DoC (1995) A copynght product obtaInable from CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK Petryszak, R, Young, Land CauvaIn, S (1995) Improvmg cake product qUalIty, m Proceedings of Expert Systems 95, the Fifteenth Annual Conference of the Bntlsh Computer Society Speczahst Group on Expert Systems, December, pp 161-8 Young, L (1991) The FMBRA Bread Faults Expert System Manufacturing Intelligence No 6 - Spring, Department of Trade and Industry London, pp 18-19 Young, Land Cauvam, S (1994) AdVISIng the baker, m Proceedings of Expert Systems 94, the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Brltlsh Computer Society Speczahst Group on Expert Systems, December, pp 21-33 {{page:214}}
