---
book: "Technology of Breadmaking"
book_slug: "cauvain-technology-of-breadmaking"
author: "Stanley P. Cauvain & Linda S. Young"
lang: "en"
relevance: "core"
chapter: "Chapter 8: Baking around the world"
heading: "Chapter 8: Baking around the world"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 8: Baking around the world"]
order: 8
source_page: 214
tokens_est: 12348
---

# Chapter 8: Baking around the world

{{page:214}} JOHN T. GOULD Introduction Why is it that 'bread' means different things in different parts of the world? Place a loaf of white North American pan bread beside a loaf of Central European rye bread, Middle Eastern pita bread or Chinese steam bread and it could justifiably be said that they are all quite different products. Yet they are all bread. Why do bakers in different parts of the world use quite different equipment to make the same, or almost same, product? To be able to answer these questions and hence understand baking in Europe, Africa, North America, Australasia and Asia, it is first necessary to appreciate • the historical development of breadmaking; • the factors which influence the process of breadmaking; • customer expectations. These factors are considered in the following sections. History The breadmaking process is the interaction of raw materials, equipment, procedures and people in a particular environment. The end product which results from this interaction depends on the characteristics of each of the above process components. It will also depend on customer requirements and expectations. Historically, the most dominant of the process components have been raw materials and environment. Over the centuries, and more particularly in Western countries, the nature of bread has changed over time with the evolution of modem wheats, the process by which they have been converted into flour, and technological advances in baking itself. The evolutionary path of bread baking wheat from the primitive parents Triticum boeuticum and Triticum dieoccoides has been different in different parts of the world. These differences have resulted mainly from variations in climate, soil and culture, though in more recent years other environmental aspects, such as the economic, industrial and scientific factors, together with political development have had a significant effect. Because the evolution of wheat has occurred in different ways in different parts of the world, so the nature of bread evolved differently in various countries © Thomson Science 1998 {{page:198}} and regions. Faridi and Faubion (1995) classified the different breads of the world in this way: • those with high specific volume, such as the pan breads of the UK, North America and other Western countries; • those with medium specific volume, such as French bread and many rye breads; • those with low specific volume, e.g. flat breads of the Middle East and Eastern countries. Each of these breads has its own particular characteristics which have resulted from the process of interaction referred to earlier. A sample from a shipment of wheat from Danzig in the Baltic is attributed as the forerunner of the vast wheat industry of North America (Bailey, 1975). A wheat from an area not now known as being ideal for bread wheat found a true home in the North American countries and set the standards not only for future generations of wheat but also dictated the type of bread which was to become the standard for Canada and the USA, with of course some regional differences. Thus it is seen that an ordinary wheat from one part of the world became a much better wheat in the New World. This wheat was known as Red Fyfe after the farmer who first grew it in Canada. This transition is an example of the chance development of wheat which occurred from the earliest days until the latter part of the nineteenth century. Since then, scientists have used the principles of genetics and have developed variations of wheat to suit the needs of particular areas. More recently, particular types of bread and other flour-based foods have resulted from new wheat varieties. Red Fyfe was to be one of the parents of what has been described by Professor Boyle of Connell University in the USA 'As the greatest single advance ever made in the United States.' Boyle was referring to the Maquis variety of wheat which had been bred in Canada by Sir Charles Saunders in 1903 (Bailey, 1975). Special mention has been made of these developments in Canada because of the standing and influence of Canadian wheat on the world wheat market. For over half a century, Maquis became the standard by which bread wheats were measured, not only in North America, but in most Western countries. Cereal breeders in other parts of the world have not necessarily had the same ideal circumstances to work with. In particular, the climate and soil have imposed limitations on the extent to which hard-grained high-quality bread wheats can be consistently grown. The consequence of this has been a continuation of the production of bread-type wheats which originated in those areas. It should not be forgotten, however, that consumer preference is likely to have a significant influence on a wheat breeding programme. Sidhu (1995), when writing of wheat breeding in Pakistan, quotes 'Chapatis which have creamish white colour, soft silky texture and sweet wheatish aroma are preferred by the {{page:199}} BAKING AROUND THE WORLD consumers'. The country's wheat breeding programmes are accordingly oriented to select wheat varieties conforming to these traits. However, with the advent of modern communication, travel and trade, bread varieties originally confined to a particular area are now made in many countries of the world, and examples of this type of cross-culture in bread are provided by Qarooni (1995). This movement of bread types between countries and cultures can pose problems for bakers. For example, French bread is a challenge to bakers outside France. This is a challenge which can be overcome but does need an understanding of what makes French bread what it is. In Table 8.1 it is notable that those countries where French bread is popular are the countries with a French colonial presence in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. Significantly, some of the best French bread in Australia is made by immigrant Vietnamese bakers who learned their craft from their former French colonial masters. The special qualities of French bread are said to be due to the flour, the water, the yeast, the ovens, the atmosphere, the temperature, the Eiffel Tower, the aroma of coffee and Gitane cigarettes, the temper of the femme de boulanger and of current politics (Bailey, 1975). This statement will be examined later in the light of modern thinking about the baking process. A historical aspect of bread baking which perhaps still has an impact on Table 8.1 Popular types of bread m ASian, Middle Eastern and North Afncan countnes (Qaroom, 1995) Country Bread type Afghamstan Naan, Chapatt and European bread Algena Matlowa, French bread, Khobz El-daar, European bread Tanoor, ArabiC, Chapatt, European bread, Samoon Babram Djlboutt Klsra Baladl, Shaml, Samoon, French, Fatter, Shamsl, Bataw, European Egypt Barban, Tanoor (Taftoon), Lavash, Teen, Suage, Sangak, European, Iran French Tanoor (Khobz), ArabiC, Samoon, European bread Iraq EthIOpia Injera Sadj, Tarboon, Klmaj (ArabiC), European bread Israel Annam, Mafrood, Sauj, European bread Jordan Tanoor, ArabiC, European bread Kuwait Lebanese, Suaj, European bread Lebanon French bread, ArabiC Libya Moroccan Khobz El-daar, French, European Morocco ArabiC, Tanoor, Chapattt, European Oman Samouh, Mafoud, Tannoun, BUIT, Tamees, Korsan, European bread Saudi Arabia Injera Somaha Injera, Shamsl, Baladl Sudan Mafrood (ArabiC), Annam, Samoon, Suaj, European Syna Trabllsl, French bread Tumsla Balzuma, Gomme, Yafka, French and other European bread Turkey Tanoor, Chapatt, ArabiC, Samoon, European Umted Arab Ellllrates Rott, Malouge, French, European bread Yemen {{page:200}} today's thinking about bread is that of adulteration. Particularly in Europe and the UK, the histories of bread make reference to various practices of economically hard-pressed millers and bakers adulterating flour and bread with chalk, rye and alum, bean meal, slaked lime and bone ash. In Roman times, bakers were accused of adding a whitening agent to their bread. It is thought that this may have been magnesium carbonate. The accuracy of these accusations is somewhat doubtful but then, as now, the public seemed to want to believe the worst of bakers. Adrian Bailey in The Blessings of Bread (1975) attributes most of the reasons for adulteration to the economic pressure placed on millers and bakers and the perception that white bread was seen as being preferable to the dark (by today's standards) bread produced from the so-called white flour then available to them. When attitudes towards bread are considered today, little has changed. White bread has to be white. Bakers still use additives to achieve this. It must be said, though, that soya flour is a much healthier ingredient than most of those listed above. In most countries, regulatory standards, combined with today's sophisticated analytical techniques, ensure that the ingredients in bread are beneficial, not just to the baker, but also to consumers. Old attitudes die hard, though, and bakers and the baking industry still have an incomplete public relations task to convince consumers that today's bread is one of the safest food products on the shelves of the corner store or supermarket. The claim by Bailey that adulteration in the early nineteenth century in the UK was the result of 'the desperate intense competition between bakers following the abolition of price fixing in 1815' also rings a bell when today's marketplace is considered. To the environmental and cultural differences which have influenced the type of bread which is predominant in a particular country has been added the consequences of the various waves of refugees and immigrants which have moved between countries. Reference has already been made to the Vietnamese in Australia. Other examples are easy to find, not only in Australia, but in many other countries, of how people of different nationalities have influenced the bread types in their new homelands. One of the most important examples of industrial progress which influenced the type of bread being produced was the introduction of roller mills to flour milling in the mid-nineteenth century. Only with this introduction could flour be produced which was almost completely free of the bran and germ which caused the darkness which was present even in the so-called white bread previously produced. Facilitating as it did the more efficient removal of bran and germ, the advent of this flour was also the first significant step on the way to producing bread with the keeping qualities expected of today's packaged bread. Other steps along this road have been the result of the application of science to breadmaking, which began in the late nineteenth century. These included better wheats {{page:201}} BAKING AROUND THE WORLD following scientific breeding, oxidizing agents such as potassium bromate, refined fats, then emulsifiers, and followed later still by enzymes. All of these have only been made possible by improved scientific understanding of the breadmaking process. Lore has gradually been replaced with scientific fact which, together with the ability to control the process, allows the production of the consistent product seen in most Western supermarkets. Just as the Industrial Revolution provided the steel for the roller mills, so did it provide the steel for the first modem mixing machines and other bakery equipment. Of course, this equipment also needed the power to operate it - first this was steam and later electricity. To those people working to today's modem bakeries in Western countries, it is difficult to imagine that, what is now seen as essential to produce a product to satisfy present customers, 100 years ago had not even been heard of. Other environmental factors which have changed the nature of bread, particularly in Western countries, are methods of distribution and the advent of the supermarket. While the supply chain has lengthened and the time from oven to table has extended from minutes to hours or days, customers still expect their bread to be soft and palatable, i.e. 'fresh'. To achieve this the original flour, water, yeast and salt has, of necessity, been supplemented with a variety of 'improvers' and specialized packaging films. With this background it is appropriate now to consider the breadmaking process in detail. The breadmaking process Wherever bread is made around the world, to ensure that it is of acceptable quality to those who eat it, it is essential that the interactions between the various parts of the baking process are compatible and in balance with each other. The extent of the balance established between the raw materials, procedures and equipment determines not only the quality of the end product but also the consistency of maintaining that quality. Craft bakers, whether they are in a peasant home in India or in the village high street in England, achieve this balance by subtle alterations to what they do as they proceed through the process. In contrast, the constraints inherent in automated mechanical baking dictate the need for sophisticated quality assurance systems to ensure consistent product quality. Raw materials, particularly flour, which produce an acceptable or even superior product in one part of the world may not do so when used under different circumstances in another country. Similarly, equipment developed for producing Western-type pan breads in one country may need considerable modification or the addition of supplementary equipment to produce the same type of bread using different flour, or indeed the same flour under altered environmental conditions. There have been many instances where a failure to recognize these {{page:202}} factors has resulted in unsatisfactory performance in bakeries and frustration for all involved. In order to understand why this is so, it is necessary to understand the basic processes of baking and how these apply in the situations which prevail in different countries, when different products are being made, or where different environmental conditions apply. When considering this approach it is necessary to start, not with the raw materials or the equipment, but with the question 'who are the customers and what do they want?' If the customer is a supermarket shopper in the UK looking for a loaf of bread with which to make sandwiches for lunch the following day, that person will be looking to buy a product which is already sliced, which will still be soft and palatable at lunchtime tomorrow, which can be spread easily with butter or margarine without coming apart (flexible crumb). Not only this, but any leftover bread should freeze and retain the above properties when thawed. In addition, if it is not used for sandwiches, it should brown evenly and quickly when toasted! Compare this with the expectations of villagers in India and Pakistan when they make their own chapattis, or less commonly, buy them from a local baker. Sidhu (1995) states 'Probably the consumers of chapatti in Pakistan have not yet abandoned the age-old concept of using their product fresh from the hot plate (baking griddle).' The same author also stated that 'the two most important quality parameters for chapatti (in India) are softness and flexibility.' Thus two extremes of breadmaking sophistication have as their main quality characteristics softness and flexibility. At one end of the scale this is achieved by refining the raw material, processing to a high specific volume (giving a soft product to start with) and retarding the staling process by the addition of various anti-staling agents. At the other extreme these properties are achieved by eating the product immediately it is made. However, in both instances it is necessary to have the right type of wheat with which to start the process. Sidhu claims that more research is needed into the popularization of commercially produced chapatti and other baked products in Pakistan to produce a product with the same characteristics as that straight from the griddle. In attempting to understand these extremes of breadmaking sophistication, it is also relevant to consider other factors which are basic to breadmaking, irrespective of the type of product. Sidhu gives a flow chart for chapatti preparation and after adding water to flour the next step is described as 'mix into smooth dough'. There is a clue here to one of the fundamentals of breadmaking - dough development. Flour and dough development The extent to which dough should be mixed and developed depends on the type of flour available, the subsequent process steps, as well as the characteristics of the end product. Note there is no reference here to any testing method. Rather it is end product quality which should determine the required amount of development. {{page:203}} BAKING AROUND THE WORLD North American breadmaking wheats require considerable mixing to achieve optimum development. This is true even if the mixing stage is followed by a period of bulk fermentation. If the fermentation stage is reduced, or even eliminated (no-time doughs), even more development is required at the mixing stage (Table 8.2). It should be noted that, according to Faridi and Faubion (1995), the three different processes are used in different circumstances and the end products may be somewhat different. However, to achieve the same result in the same product, using the same raw materials, it can be assumed that the shorter the fermentation time, the longer the mixing time required. Bread baking flours in countries other than North America often require shorter mixing times than their North American counterparts. Similarly, users of the Chorleywood Bread Process (CBP) find that the wheat varieties from different countries require different levels of work input to achieve optimum development. Difficulties can arise when this is not understood and major changes are made in a mill wheat grist. For example, if a mill changes from locally grown wheat to imported wheat without taking into account the requirements of the bakery, signficant changes in the mixing requirement (work input) can result. Similarly, the writer has observed instances where the CBP has been installed in a bakery without an understanding of the available raw materials. The local flour was made from North American wheat with an optimum work input of 20 W hJkg. As the temperature of the flour was usually about 30°C (a tropical country) there was little chance that optimum development could be achieved while maintaining dough temperatures of approximately 32°C. Significant flour cooling equipment needed to be installed to overcome the problem - the alternative was for underdeveloped doughs with a significant reduction in product quality. Collins (personal communication, 1993) has described such flour as 'awkward'. However, it is only awkward if it is being used in bakenes where the process has been designed without taking into account the nature of the available flour. A further example was observed by the writer, in Israel in the mid-1980s, where the importation of North American wheat to supplement local supplies caused real problems III a bakery using the CBP. In this instance the need to increase work input beyond 11 W hJkg had not been recognized. A poor-quality product was the result. The presence or absence of other ingredients in a dough can also affect the amount of mixing required to suit the process. This has been demonstrated Table 8.2 ProcessIng conditions for North Amencan wheats (Fandl and FaubIOn, 1995) Process Total mixIng time Total fennentatlOn CysteIne added (mIn) time (h) (ppm) 15-17 3-5 Sponge and dough 16-21 2 Straight dough 16-21 No-time straight dough {{page:204}} where the use of potassium bromate has been discontinued in countries using the CBP. If ascorbic acid is used to replace bromate, a buckier, less developed dough results at the moulding stage. To overcome this, mixing, or development, need to be increased. Related to the need to identify the correct mixing required for optimum development are the methods used for testing flour. Skilled craft bakers the world over may be able to adjust their processes to take into account variations in raw materials and the environment. However, in today's environment, where consumers expect consistency in product quality, such an approach is inappropriate for industrial plant bakeries. In these situations the ability to control the total process within clearly defined parameters is an essential prerequisite to producing bread of consistent quality. A logical consequence of this is that the performance characteristics of raw materials must be known before they enter the bakery. This being the case, attempts to establish international standards for flour testing, which do not take into account the process being used, are doomed to failure. While it is true that good bread baking flour can always produce good bread (Western style), it can only do this if it is treated in accordance with the functionality in the process being used. This has not always been recognized and the examples quoted above illustrate the difficulties which can be encountered when relying on so-called traditional flour testing methods. New Zealand bakers and scientists recognized this soon after the introduction of the CBP into that country. Flours which were available there for making bread in the late 1960s and 1970s often only required half the work input that had been advocated by the originators of the process. The recognition of this led to a method of flour testing which closely approximated the CBP (Mitchell, 1982), a method which bakers in that country could confidently rely on to predict the performance of flour in their CBP-equipped bakeries. The popularity of the CBP in New Zealand is, in no small part, due to this ability to predict flour performance accurately, but also to the fact that it was introduced to New Zealand for the same reasons underlying its development in the UK, i.e. to make better bread from relatively poor, by North American standards, flours. Today, in excess of 90% of packaged bread is produced by the CBP in New Zealand. Consistency of quality can also be obtained by introducing a very high degree of tolerance into the process. This, in turn, can be achieved in a number of ways. One of these is to underutilize the quality potential of the flour being used. This was dramatically demonstrated in South African bakeries observed by the writer in the mid-1980s. Potassium bromate was not a permitted additive, the baking industry was under strict government control and most of the bread observed appeared to have been produced from immature, or green, doughs. The result was loaf after loaf, looking and eating exactly the same. It wasn't bread of the highest quality, but it was absolutely consistent. In this case the tolerance of the process to variations in the raw materials and the environment was very wide. {{page:205}} BAKING AROUND THE WORLD With the recent deregulation of the industry and the availability of modem improvers, it has been observed that the general quality of South African white bread has improved dramatically, but it is no longer so consistent. The tolerance of the process has been reduced. Water After flour, the next most important ingredient used in breadmaking is water. The impact of water addition on quality is often overlooked. Siebel (1994), in recognizing the importance of freshness in determining consumer acceptance, claims that 'higher water additions are being used world wide, resulting in more sensitive doughs needing special equipment'. This is probably only true for pan breads. In order to maintain their shape, varieties of bread baked on the sole of the oven or in shallow pans need to be made from firmer doughs than those used for pan bread. This will be a contributing factor to the way in which the keeping qualities of these breads diminish rapidly after the bread leaves the oven. A baker accustomed to making continental, or European, type hearth breads will have difficulty in adjusting to the need to increase the water to the extent necessary to produce longer-keeping pan bread. However, English bakers are gaining a reputation in other parts of the world for overdoing the water addition. The sensitivity to dough damage during processing is very obvious in much of the pan bread produced in the UK. Extra water addition appears to have been embraced for economic reasons rather than for improving quality. At the other end of the scale, in countries where bread weight has been determined by measuring the dry solids content, as, until recently, in some Australian states, water addition has been limited. This had the opposite effect and bread keeping quality was adversely affected. A change in legislation in some Australian states in the early 1990s highlights the need to take into account the local legislative component of the environment when considering factors which influence the breadmaking process. In this case, bread weight legislation changed from a dry solids basis to net weight. This had a significant effect on bakers' expectations of flour water absorption, to which some mills had difficulty in adjusting. Also, water absorption became much more of a significant factor in determining the acceptability of new wheat varieties for the domestic market. Yeast Modem bread yeasts are now available in most countries of the world. Compressed yeast and cream yeast are by far the most commonly used in plant bakeries. Active dry and vacuum-packed instant yeasts are now readily available and are often used in those areas where distribution is difficult and storage facilities are inadequate to maintain the viability of live yeast. {{page:206}} Salt The use of salt in bread is mainly influenced by consumer preference and varies from the extremes of zero for unleavened chapatti to a reported 3% for a popular Hungarian product (Lasztity, 1995). Most Western-type pan bread is usually made from doughs containing around 2% salt by weight of flour. Other improvers The use of dried vital wheat gluten, fats, soya flours, emulsifiers, malt flours and enzyme-active preparations varies greatly from country to country and from one type of bread to another. Maintaining product quality determines the type of improver required and the extent to which it is used. Also, variations in flour quality, environmental conditions and equipment idiosyncrasies all have an influence. For instance, one would not expect to find a widespread use of malt flour in northern Europe where wheats with low Falling Numbers are common (Salvaara and Fjell, 1995). This is in contrast to the wheat in many Australian states which commonly have Falling Numbers in excess of 400 and malt flour is often used as a base in improver mixtures. In some instances legislative control determines the level to which various additives can be used in bread; for example, in Australia at present there are legislative limits to many commonly used emulsifiers. In New Zealand there are no legislated levels for emulsifiers and bakers there have tended to use higher levels than their Australian counterparts. The result is that the crumb characteristics of New Zealand white pan bread tend to be finer, but less resilient, than that found in most Australian bread. It will be interesting to observe whether or not the current review of the Australian Food Standards Code will allow the greater use of emulsifiers in bread. Of even greater interest will be whether Australian bakers would make greater use of emulsifiers to alter subtly the characteristics of the bread produced or if present consumer expectations will prevail. Dividing Following mixing and development of the dough, either entirely in the mixer, for no-time doughs, CBP and continuous mixers, or by fermentation, the next stage in the breadmaking process is usually dividing the original bulk dough into the sized pieces needed for further processing and baking. This is just as true for the unsophisticated domestic production of chapatti as it is for the mechanical production of Western-style packaged breads (Sidhu, 1995). The bulk dough must be divided into pieces of specified weight to produce a loaf of the nominated net weight without damaging the delicate structure of the dough. This double objective often requires a compromise between achieving accuracy {{page:207}} BAKING AROUND THE WORLD of weight and minimal damage to the dough. This compromise is not often fully appreciated by some machinery manufacturers whose experience is frequently limited to one type of process. Australian and New Zealand bakers have had difficulty in convincing manufacturers of extrusion-type dividers that while that type of divider admirably meets the first part of the objective very well, it can cause severe damage to the delicate structure of CBP doughs. This damage can, to some extent, be reduced by the use of stronger flours, or by the addition of dried gluten. However, this negates any cost advantage of improved accuracy. For this reason most bakeries in these countries still prefer to use suction dividers. As mentioned earlier, this sensitivity to dough damage during processing is apparent in much of the plant bread produced in the UK. Resting This is not the term commonly used to describe the stage in bread production between moulding and dividing. Sidhu used it in his flow charts describing the production of unleavened bread. This is in contrast with the Western term, intermediate proof, which describes the stage of breadmaking where the dough is allowed to relax before mOUlding. Of course, intermediate proof, implying as it does yeast activity, would be quite inappropriate when referring to unleavened bread. The term 'intermediate' refers to the proofing stage following bulk fermentation (first proof) but before final proof prior to baking. Where no bulk fermentation takes place, e.g. in no-time doughs, first proof would be a more accurate term. However, the term 'intermediate proof' is firmly fixed in bakery terminology around the world. The purpose of intermediate proof is to produce a piece of dough which is sufficiently soft, extensible and relaxed to allow optimum performance in the moulding stage. It also provides time for dough pieces to become properly mature. Apart from equipment variations, the main difference found in this stage of breadmaking is that of time. This can vary from zero in the case of some continuous bread production methods to as much as 2 h used by some methods of producing continental types of bread. In the latter case the intermediate proof partially replaces bulk fermentation, but it also serves to create the very open texture preferred by the consumers of this bread. In this case it is not just relaxation which takes place but it also allows the considerable yeast activity necessary to produce the carbon dioxide required to create the preferred texture characteristics. This dough structure needs to be maintained during the next stage. Moulding The purpose of moulding is to create a dough piece of the right shape while at the same time producing a dough structure which will result in the best possible {{page:208}} texture in both the internal crumb and external crust of the final product. In the example of continental bread referred to in the previous section, this means very gentle moulding so as not to damage the texture formed during intermediate proof. This is also true for the correct moulding of CBP doughs. In this process the required dough structure is formed at the mixing stage and should be protected right through to the actual baking. Doerry (1995) claims that the purpose of the first stage of moulding, sheeting, is to expel the excess gas from the dough pieces, thus 'degassing' it. While this may be an appropriate description for what happens in North American bakeries, there is no explanation as to how this can be achieved without damaging the structure of the dough. It certainly does not apply to CBP doughs where, throughout the process, it is essential to maintain the structure of the dough created during mixing. Panning and pans It is a matter for discussion as to whether the pans used by bakers in different parts of the world determine or reflect many of the characteristics of the final product. In the mid-1980s bakers in New Zealand introduced a new baking pan which significantly changed the size and shape of what had been the traditional loaf shape in that country. From being a relatively long narrow shape the loaf became rather shorter, broader and higher. The specific volume was increased by about 25% from approximately 4.0 ml/g to 5 ml/g or somewhat higher. This type of product, which was much softer, met with immediate consumer acceptance and is now the standard shape for packaged bread. In response to consumer demands for even softer bread, the specific volume is now approximately 6.0 ml/g. It is interesting to note that in doing this, New Zealand bakers were able to increase the oven throughput and thus obtain an economic benefit. In contrast, as a result of a different oven tray and pan configuration, Australian bakers, in doing the same, were faced with a reduced throughput but, because of the consumer acceptance experienced in New Zealand, made the change regardless. The consumer acceptance in Australia has been similar to that in New Zealand. It is also relevant to note that Nagao (1995) reports that in Japan 'the introduction of a new white pan bread with a softer crumb than normal was welcomed by consumers and resulted in the recovery of total white bread consumption.' The writer has also observed that so-called premium packaged breads in the UK have a higher specific volume, i.e. they are less dense than the 'standard' product. The premium product attracts a higher price. Such moves demonstrate the advisability, indeed necessity, of producing bread which meets consumer requirements. The use of pans allows bread doughs to be softer and to flow more than when the dough piece is required to be self-supporting, and hence is a prerequisite for the production of 'soft' bread. {{page:209}} BAKING AROUND THE WORLD Final proof With the possible exception of single-layer flat bread, the doughs for leavened bread are subjected to a period of raising before being baked. The purpose of this is to allow the moulded dough piece to relax and expand to produce an aerated piece of dough which, when baked, will be of the required shape and volume. The warm, humid conditions which are necessary for this process to occur are well understood and practised by bakers everywhere. There is perhaps a lesser understanding of the time needed for this to produce the required results. Failure to allow enough time can result in the dough piece being unable to relax sufficiently even though it has risen the required amount. This in tum can result in misshapen loaves and has been evidenced in both Australia and New Zealand when process and raw material changes have occurred. This is another example of the challenges which are faced when transferring technology from one environment to another. An exception to the humid proof conditions is that of double-layered flat breads. During the final proof of these products the surface dries out, resulting in the formation of a skin which assists in the formation of the double layer during baking (Qarooni, 1995). Baking Baking is the final step in the making of a loaf of bread, during which heat is applied causing the rapid expansion of gas in the dough, water to be driven off, the gelatinization of starch and the coagulation of proteins. These reactions, together with the formation of a crust, transform an unpalatable dough piece into a (light) porous palatable loaf of bread which is nice to eat. It is the last few words of the above definition which distinguish the different types of bread. Not only do the types of oven differ significantly, but baking times can vary from as low as 18-20 s for Arabic bread (Qarooni, 1995) to over 1 h for heavy, dense rye breads of Eastern Europe. The range of temperature is equally wide; between 150 and 650°C. These extremes may seem way out to bakers used to baking Western-type breads at around 200°C. Each situation can be explained by the fundamental principles of heat transfer and a knowledge of the gelatinization properties of moist starch. With the very thin Arabic breads the intense heat from the clay oven very quickly gelatinizes the starch and coagulates the proteins in the centre with minimal crust formation. The thicker the bread, the longer this process takes. In double-layered Arabic bread the rapid generation of steam and expansion of carbon dioxide during the first stage of baking forces the separation of the top and bottom crusts and creates the characteristic pocket. This is the same process which takes place in Western-style pan breads, but the lower temperature, slower heat transfer, and different volume and shape of dough produce a different result. Attempts to vary the process for making {{page:210}} Arabic bread by retarding doughs result in a product which could be acceptable to Western consumers but may not find favour with those used to the traditional product (Inoue, 1995). Bakers with an understanding of heat transfer principles will also recognize that differing oven conditions found in bakeries in Western countries are necessary because of different characteristics of the end products. In New Zealand and Australia the move in recent years to bread of higher specific volume has also resulted in reduced baking times. The heat transfer in the less dense dough piece means that the internal temperature can reach the required level, 96°C, sooner than was previously the case. Cooling In the markets where sliced and packaged bread predominate, bakers are required to give close attention to the conditions under which bread is cooled before it is sliced and packed. During this stage of bread production it is necessary to reduce the temperature of the bread to a level at which it can be sliced and packed without damage to the loaf either during slicing and packing, or later due to excessive mould growth. In markets where there are no restrictions on the moisture content of bread, the extent of moisture loss and hence weight loss during cooling needs to be taken into account. This moisture loss can be significant and should be avoided. Not only will excessive moisture loss adversely affect the cost of manufacture but it will also accelerate the staling process. The design of a bread cooler which may be suitable for the climatic conditions experienced in the UK would be quite inadequate to deal with the humid conditions in a country like Singapore or the extremely dry conditions of, say, Perth in Australia. Each of these situations requires its own particular design criteria to enable bread to be cooled under conditions which will produce optimum results. Like every other stage of the breadmaking process, the correct balance of all the factors involved needs to be achieved. Machinery manufacturers and bakers alike need to adopt a much more theoretical approach to the specification of equipment used in different situations. Using first principles, process requirements need to be matched with equipment design to produce the required results under the conditions where the operation will take place. With regard to coolers the Australian Bread Research Institute has identified most of the problems and developed appropriate solutions (Adamczak and Kalitsis, 1992). Slicing and packing The final stage in the production of modem Western bread is also subject to variations from country to country. Depending on the nature of the product and {{page:211}} BAKING AROUND THE WORLD consumer preference, the thickness of the slice can vary, as can the package. For instance, the thickness of sandwich bread in New Zealand is approximately 10 mm while in Australia for a similar type of loaf it is 13 mm. Not only this, but the type of equipment will also differ considerably. The different type of bread found in different Western countries also dictates the type of slicing machine used. This difference has been demonstrated recently in New Zealand. As the specific volume of the bread has increased, bakers have changed from using the reciprocating slicers common in the UK to the band slicers usually found in North American bakeries. The band slicers handle the softer, higher volume bread much better than the reciprocating slicers. At the other end of the scale it is necessary to employ special spinning disc slicers to cut very heavy, dense rye bread. Packaging The function of bread packaging for Western-style breads can be described as: • to contain the slices and crusts together in a single unit for handling purposes; • to maintain product quality by reducing crumb drying, minimizing the risk of contamination; • to present an appealing and informative package to the consumer. The most common material now used in Western countries is a low-density polyethylene, usually in the form of bags. This product provides a good barrier to water vapour, thus inhibiting drying, is easy to handle, and provides a clear background through which the consumer can see the product being purchased. Many attempts have been made to package French-style country breads so that the crustiness can be maintained - these have not met with any great success. Similarly, attempts to maintain crustiness while microwaving have not been very successful. The migration of water vapour from the internal crumb to the crust has foiled all trials to date. With the increasing emphasis on consumer information in many countries, the bread package, like other food packaging, is becoming more and more informative. The responsibility of bakers to ensure that the information they provide is accurate has also increased. Consumer laws regarding misrepresentation and false information mean that not only must the original source of the information be correct, but that products within the package must be consistently made to standard recipes. This all requires an extremely high level of quality assurance. The international market Western style bread is now made in many Asian, Middle Eastern and African countries. Arab-style pocket bread is made in many Western countries. French- {{page:212}} style crusty bread is made throughout the world. Canadian, American and Australian wheats are exported all around the world. The result of all this is that many traditional methods have been modified and traditional products have had their characteristics altered as they have been made with non-traditional flours and equipment. Tradespeople in some countries have had to be extremely versatile in adapting to an inconsistent supply of flour made from wheat which has been imported, stored and distributed with little or no regard for its breadmaking properties (Sidhu, 1995). Consumers who have not been exposed to an authentic loaf, made within its homeland, may become accustomed to a somewhat different product. To overcome some of these problems, much work has been done in some laboratories in an effort to characterize the flour, and hence wheat, requirements for products made from wheat grown in one country and exported to another. The Australian Bread Research Institute has defined appropriate flour requirements for products such as Arab bread (Quail, 1996) and Chinese steam bread to be made from Australian wheat. Similarly the American Institute of Baking as well as the Canadian Grain Commission (Kilborn and Tipples, 1981) have studied the breadmaking processes used in countries importing wheat from their countries. In many cases the challenge still remaining is for that knowledge to be transferred from the original publications to practical use. This challenge applies not only from country to country but within individual countries. The results of what is probably the most successful transfer of baking knowledge on an international scale can be seen in the ubiquitous Big Mac. The McDonalds hamburger chain has been successful in facilitating the worldwide adaptation of the baking process and raw materials to produce a product which is indistinguishable from country to country. This is an excellent example of the requirements of the end product dictating not only the control of the manufacturing process but also the specifications of all the raw materials. This has resulted in, at least in New Zealand, a special wheat being grown. This has only been achieved by a thorough and complete understanding of the principles involved. One aspect of this, which applies to at least some Western countries, is the need to distinguish between craft skills and those required by operators of large plant bakeries. Most practical courses for bakers place a heavy emphasis on the former to the detriment of those whose skills should be in operating what should be the rigidly controlled process of automated bread manufacture. A step towards achieving this is, at the time of writing, being developed in Australia. In that country the Plant Baking Industry, in conjunction with the Australian National Food Industry Training Council is in the process of developing a 'National Certificate in Food Processing - Plant Baking'. It is anticipated that this certificate will eventually replace traditional apprenticeships as far as most plant bakery operations are concerned. It is also interesting to note the fact that this project is being conducted under the auspices of the Cooperative Research Centre for Quality Wheat Products, a joint industry and government research initiative. Such an integration of research and training follows that adopted by {{page:213}} BAKING AROUND THE WORLD organizations such as the American Institute of Baking, the Australian Bread Research Institute and the New Zealand Crop and Food Research Institute Ltd. This approach facilitates the uptake of research findings by industry and ensures that the most up-to-date knowledge is included in training programmes. As a result of the research being carried out in cereal food laboratories around the world, the molecular basis of the baking process IS gradually becoming clearer. With this level of understanding it is only a matter of time before a technological breakthrough occurs. As the basic building block in the process is dough formation, this breakthrough is likely to occur in that area of cereal science. Already the possibility of lower energy requirements for dough development IS being mentioned (Larsen, 1996). Such an eventuality is likely to impact on all breadmaking methods with benefits accrumg not only to Western countries but to the whole world of baking. We can but Wait and see. References Adamczak, T P and Kalltsls, J (1992) Coolmg control m the bread mdustry Paper presented to 42nd RACl Cereal ChemIstry Conference, Chnstchurch, New Zealand Bailey, A (1975) BleSSings of Bread, Paddmgton Press Ltd, London Doerry, W P (1995) Breadmaklng Technology, Amencan Instttute of Bakmg, Manhattan, Kansas, USA, p 175 Fandl, M A (1988) Flat bread, m Wheat ChemIstry & Technology, Volume II, 3rd edn (ed Y Pomeranz), Amencan ASSOCiatIOn of Cereal Cherrusts, St Paul, Mmnesota, USA, pp 457-98 Fandl, H and FaubIOn, J M (1995) Wheat usage m North Amenca, m Wheat End Uses Around the World (eds H Fandl and J M FaubIOn), Amencan ASSOCiation of Cereal Cherrusts, St Paul, Mmnesota, USA, Chapter I, Plate I Inoue, Y (1995) Bake pita bread from a standard MOD dough and at nonnal temperature Bakers' Bulletin, New Zealand Institute for Crop & Food Research, Chnstchurch, New Zealand Kilborn, R H and Tipples, K H (1981) Canadian test bakmg procedures II GRL-Chorleywood method Cereal Foods World, 26(II), 628-30 Larsen, N J (1996) Dough development beyond 2000 Bakers' Bulletin Issue No 27, New Zealand Institute for Crop & Food Research, Chnstchurch, New Zealand Laszttty, R (1995) Wheat usage m Eastern Europe, m Wheat End Uses Around the World (eds H Fandl and J M FaubIOn), Amencan ASSOCiatIOn of Cereal Cherrusts, St Paul, Mmnesota, USA, pp 127--47 Mitchell, T A (1982) The new MOD bakmg test NZ Wheat ReVIew, 15, 1980--82,73-4 Nagao, S (1995) Wheat usage m East ASia, m Wheat End Uses Around the World (eds H Farldl and J M FaubIOn), Amencan ASSOCiatIOn of Cereal Chemists, St Paul, Mmnesota, USA, p 170 Qaroom, J (1995) Wheat usage m the Middle East and North Afnca, m Wheat End Uses Around the World (eds H Farldl and J M FaubIOn), Amencan AssoCiatton of Cereal Chemists, St Paul, Mmnesota, USA, p 226 Quail, K J (1966) ArabIC Bread Product/on, Amencan ASSOCIatIOn of Cereal Chemists, St Paul, Mmnesota, USA Salvaara, HOM and FJell, K M (1995) Wheat usage m northern Europe, m Wheat End Uses Around the World (eds H Fandl and J M FaubIOn), Amencan ASSOCiatIOn of Cereal Cherrusts, St Paul, Mmnesota, USA, p 158 Seibel, W (1994) Recent research progress m breadmakmg technology, m Wheat ProductIOn PropertIes and Quallty (eds W Busheck and V F Rasper), Blackle Acaderruc and ProfeSSIOnal, Glasgow, p 67 Sidhu, J S (1995) Wheat usage m the Indian sub-contment, m Wheat End Uses Around the World (c(h H Fdfldl and J M FaubiOn), American ASSOCiatIOn of Cereal ChemIsts, St Paul, Mmnesota, USA, p 210 {{page:231}}
