---
book: "Technology of Breadmaking"
book_slug: "cauvain-technology-of-breadmaking"
author: "Stanley P. Cauvain & Linda S. Young"
lang: "en"
relevance: "core"
chapter: "Chapter 9: Speciality fermented goods"
heading: "Chapter 9: Speciality fermented goods"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 9: Speciality fermented goods"]
order: 9
source_page: 231
tokens_est: 16935
---

# Chapter 9: Speciality fermented goods

{{page:231}} A.J. BENT Introduction 'Foreign breads slice white sales' appeared as a headline of an article by Joanna Bale, in The Times on 13 August 1996. The article stated that 'While croissants and others increase in popularity the humble loaf of bread continues to fallout of favour. Consumers are becoming more adventurous and acquiring a taste for the new products available'. The term 'speciality fermented goods' falls into the category which is rather difficult to define of 'morning goods'. The definition of morning goods can vary from 'anything that is not bread or cake - small bakery products exclusive of savoury products' to 'There is no legal definition covering this term. Morning goods range from very lean, crusty products such as Vienna breads to goods containing high levels of fat and sugar, and possibly fruit and spice, e.g. hot cross buns. They can range from laminated croissants and Danish to lean rolls'. Taking the 'anything that is not bread or cake' category leaves thousands of baked products with infinite permutations and methods of finishing. Any attempt to cover the possibilities in one chapter would result in just a mention if at all, of anyone topic. In this chapter concentration has been placed on four major areas of speciality fermented goods, namely hamburger buns, part-baked bread, croissants and Danish pastry production. Hamburger bun Production rates The latest hamburger plant available (at the time of going to print) has an output of up to 66 240 buns per line per hour. This number is obtained from an eight-lane AMF Extrusion Bun Divider operating at 138 cuts/min (AMF, 1995, states production speeds of up to 138 cuts/min), i.e. 8 x 138 x 60 = 66 240. For a week's production of say 160 h (plus 8 h cleaning and maintenance) the output of each line would be 66 240 x 160 = 10 590 400 buns. European lines of this type are said to be operating at a maximum of 125 cuts/min. Work in the USA reported by Steward (1990), Stevens (1991) and LeCrone (1994) also indicate commercial © Thomson Science 1998 {{page:215}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS speeds as 125 cuts/min, which gives an output of 1000 buns/min on an eightlane plant, i.e. 8 x 125. Even at this slightly reduced rate which equates to a weekly output of (8 x 125 x 60) x 160 = 9 600 000 buns per line, the output is substantial. The following is a brief outline of the details covering large-scale hamburger bun production. Formulation Table 9.1 compares the formula for UK standard white pan bread with that of a hamburger bun. Two major differences can be identified. Higher levels of fat/oil are used in buns compared to bread and much higher levels of sugar are added to hamburger buns. The reduced water in the hamburger bun formulation takes account of the dough softening caused by the addition of the higher levels of fat and sugar. Without this reduction, doughs would not go through a plant. The flour for high-volume production of hamburger buns is required to be strong and relatively high in functional protein, to carry the high levels of fat and sugar. Readers interested in microwaveable, hamburger bun formulations based on high fat and high fibre/water ratios are referred to Neufeld (1991). Liquid brews and fermentation Before doughmaking it is common to include some prior fermentation. Water brews were at one time popular, in which most of the yeast, some of the salt and sugar are mixed and fermented with a brew buffer for 60-90 min. Water brews based on 3.5-4.5% sugar solids and 3.0% yeast (based on flour weight) were used to develop the necessary amounts of acid to produce good buns Table 9.1 Companson of a white slIced loaf recipe and one for hamburger buns WhIte pan bread WhIte hamburger buns Ingredient 1000' 1000b Flour 1 8 18 Salt 600 550 Water (approximate) 25 30 Yeast (compressed) 10 3-5 (fat/OIl) Fat 5-10 or more Zero (m the UK) Sugar 10 10 Improver It IS difficult to give exact protem levels for a flour and whilst they are Important, low ash figures and/or low Grade Colour Figures should also be taken mto account 'Flour With a protem level of 95-11 % SUItable for pan bread made on the Chorleywood Bread Process 'A higher functIonal protem level IS reqUIred, <13% ThiS higher level for hamburger buns IS needed to mamtam gas retentIon whIle supportmg the additIonal fat/OIl and the sugar, both of which have to be earned m the fmal product and do not contnbute towards product volume WIthout the hIgher functional protem acceptable product, volume and stabilIty would be diffIcult to obtam {{page:216}} (Sutherland, 1989). Other methods involve fermenting part of the flour, in the form of a sponge. A traditional sponge takes a proportion of the flour, yeast and salt, and a tight sponge is made with water which is allowed to ferment at specific temperatures. After fermentation of the sponge the balance of the ingredients in the recipe are added and mixing follows. A flour brew (sometimes referred to as a liquid sponge) is a variation of the traditional sponge in which more water is added, usually just a little more water than flour. A much slacker, pumpable, liquid sponge is produced. Traditional monitoring of brew development during fermentation is by measurement of pH and determination of total titratable acidity or TTA. [TTA, which is the term used to describe the amount of acid in a substance, is the number of millilitres of 0.1 N NaOH needed to raise the pH of 20 g of brew to a value of 6.6 (Sutherland, 1989).] In the UK these measurements are difficult because of the addition to all flour (for use in baked products sold in the UK) of not less than 235 and no more than 390 mg (per 100 g of flour) of calcium carbonate (Bread and Flour Regulations, 1996) which buffers the brew acidity. Sutherland (1989) states that 'Salt can also be used as a buffer, but it acts differently than calcium carbonate. Salt basically retards yeast action'. Presumably this describes the effect of salt in slowing down fermentation which affects the subsequent formation of acid. Dubois (1986) discusses further the effect of salt in the brew of a liquid ferment. After a 1-3 h fermentation the flour brew is degassed, filtered and cooled down, by passing it through a heat exchanger, to between 6 and 9°C (41-48.2°F) to arrest any further fermentation. The cooled brew can then be stored in bulk, in a waterjacketed reservoir or holding tanks, ready for addition to each mix. Correct sanitation procedures should be followed between brews, i.e. water rinsing between brews, and complete system CIP (clean-in-place) must occur at regular periodic intervals, i.e. at least once a week. Prior to the start of a mix, brew is pumped into a liquid batching tank, weighed via load cells and dropped into the mixer. The normal flour level in liquid brews was usually between 40 and 50% of the total. Watkins (1991) describes the advantages of liquid ferment systems which have the capacity to handle in excess of 70% of the flour in the brew, 'the continuous liquid ferment mixer was developed to improve the mixing action, eliminate mixing damage and gluten separation, and to facilitate the incorporation of higher flour levels'. The advantages to the product are described as a softer loaf, cleaner cut, better keeping quality, improved flavour and aroma, a more resilient crumb and an improved sheen. Charbonneau et ai. (1978) describes bun manufacture with a 65% liquid ferment sponge system. Many advantages are claimed for a prior fermentation of part of the flour. One of the practical advantages of using liquid flour brew is found to be improved pan flow (i.e. the ability of dough pieces to flow and fill the base of the pan indent), but bulk flour brew held in the water-jacketed reservoir or holding vessel becomes a mixture of batches of brew, which is excellent for {{page:217}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS long, continuous production runs of similar products and also gives consistency. However, major trials should only be undertaken after the holding vessel has been emptied and cleaned of new flour brew. After cleaning, the holding vessel will be filled with new brew containing the result of a major trial. Minor trials on a day-to-day basis are restricted to those which can be carried out on the ingredients that are added at the mixer. When traditional sponges are used for prior fermentation, an individual sponge is made for each mix. The traditional sponge system allows for both major and minor trials with each batch. Sutherland (1989) gives the pH and TTA values shown in Table 9.2. In an earlier article Sutherland (1976) gave further values for ferments and doughs from flour brews, described in Table 9.3. Further information on the changes taking place in brew systems are given by Sutherland (1974), Kulp (1983) and Doerry (1985). An outline of brew equipment is given by Matz (1992). Mixing At a scaling weight of, say, a modest 50 g, the dough requirements of some plants may be up to 3310 kg (66 240 x 0.05 kg) per hour; at 85 g the hourly dough requirement will be 5630 kg. Horizontal bar mixers WIth mixing times of the order of 7-10 min are traditionally used. The machme lllixmg capacity is considerable and can be up to 1300 kg per batch. Substantial refngeration on the Table 9.2 Values of pH and TT A for vanous brews (Sutherland. 1989) pH TTA(ml) 42 10-12 90 mm water brew 2 h, 50% flour brew 495 62 3 5 h, 66% flour sponge 505 47 Table 9.3 pH and TTA values for ferments and doughs from flour brews (Sutherland, 1976) Flour (%) pH TTACml) 12-\3 42-43 0 43-44 1175-1275 10 11-12 20 44-45 45-46 10 5-11 25 30 40 95-10 5 46-47 47-475 85-10 50 Dough-developer 51-515 4-45 Dough-oven 5-55 49-495 51-52 38-42 Baked bread {{page:218}} sides of horizontal bar mixers help in producing a required ex-mixer dough temperature of approximately 26-27°C (78.8-80.6°F). The exact ex-mixer temperature will be plant specific and will be dependent on the pipe length and the heat generated during dough transfer and handling on a plant. High-speed mixers suitable for producing dough using the Chorleywood Bread Process (CBP), with energy meters to control the mixing energy and time, are used in some hamburger plants. During a standard CBP pan bread mix, to 11 W h/kg of dough, a temperature increase of the order of 15°C is generated in the dough. The control of dough temperatures during warmer months of the year becomes very important. Thompson (1983) states that doughs mixed on high-speed mixers using normal-strength American wheat flours require somewhat longer mixing times (brought about by a higher energy requirement per kilogram of dough) than those common to the softer wheat flours of the UK. This will lead to a greater increase in dough temperature during mixing. The addition of refrigerated liquid flour brew to a high-speed mixer will contribute towards controlling dough temperatures (further discussed by Thompson, 1983). When a 40% flour brew is used nearly half the weight of each mix is refrigerated flour brew. The use of the pressure/vacuum, CBP, high-speed mixer (described in Chapter 4) may have benefits in the future of hamburger bun manufacture, especially when producing them in the absence of bromate. Dough transfer After mixing, the dough is emptied into a dough pump. A pair of augers gradually move the dough through an outlet at the base of the dough pump or hopper. The dough can then be moved onto transfer conveyors or through a pipe for delivery to the divider. At maximum output of 50 g rolls, an eight-lane extrusion divider will use 0.05 x 138 x 8 = 55.2 kg dough/min. If a large mixer is used to produce, say, 1300 kg of dough, it will then take 1300/55.2 = 23.56 min before all the dough is divided. During this time some fermentation will occur and some chemical reactions will take place; the action of the augers in the dough pump is said to homogenize and degas the dough during transport. This supplies a dough of a more uniform density to the divider, from the beginning to the end of each dough (AMF, 1995). Do-flow unit The Do-flow unit is sited above the divider and is a kneader that degasses dough before it enters the divider. The Do-flow unit is said to allow precise control of product grain structure (AMF, 1995). Dough from the dough pump/hopper is delivered into the Do-flow unit onto a helical feed screw which controls the rate of dough delivery onto the developer paddle. The developer paddle further develops the dough, which is extruded as an even curtain of dough into the divider hopper. The Do-flow unit supplies the divider with a {{page:219}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS dough of uniform density from the beginning to the end of each batch, which enhances scaling delivery. The speeds of the feed screw and the developer paddle are adjustable. Dividing The bun and roll make-up systems of AMP offer two types of dividers, the Model K divider head and the Extrusion Bun divider (similar types of Do-flow units, dividers and first provers are also made by other manufacturers, e.g. Dawson and Cummins Eagle, Inc.). The Model K consists of a stainless steel rotating drum Model K divider. which has two rows (of four or six across) of cut-out cylinders. The rows are on opposite sides of the drum. Dough enters the divider hopper and is drawn by vacuum into one of the rows of cylinders. As the drum rotates, a knife cuts off the dough. In the down position a piston is activated and forces the dough to the edge of the cylinder. A wire then releases the dough from the edge of the piston bore and the dough pieces drop onto the bed of the moulder. The Model K divider can operate at up to 100 cuts or strokes per minute. The Model K uses divider oil to prevent dough from sticking. The method of operation of this divider is given in the Extrusion bun divider. name; dough is drawn in a vacuum chamber containing rotary screw augers. It is fed into a metering pump which then goes to manifolds containing adjustable valves on each outlet. Altering the valves changes the weight of dough from each outlet port. The dough is extruded from four, six or eight extrusion ports where a knife or blade cuts off or guillotines the extruded dough into equal pieces onto the bed of the moulder. Steward (1990) states that 'the device used to cut off the dough piece must operate at extremely accurate, highly repeatable frequencies in order to divide the extruding product in equal portions'. The speed range of this type of divider is from 40 to 138 cuts/min. An accuracy of ±l % is guaranteed by AMP. The operation is such that no divider oil is required. Stevens (1991) states that 'dough goes into the degasser and is automatically pumped through a metal detector feeding the eight-across guillotine bun divider'. AMF Pan-O-Mat The Pan-O-Mat rounds, first proves, forms and pans dough pieces. Prom the divider the dough pieces drop onto the moulder which consists of an endless belt. Across the moulder belt four, six or eight rounder bars are accurately placed. The dough pieces travel down specially concave rounder bars, which are designed to round each dough piece into a smooth, surface-sealed ball. Dough pieces, which originally left the mixer at 26-27°C (78.8-80.6°P) and {{page:220}} have passed through a dough pump, Do-flow unit, and a Model K dividing head leave the rounder bars at a temperature of approximately 30°C (86°P). Steward (1990) states that with the extrusion type of divider, because no oil is used on the dough or the rounder belt, the dough balls begin to round immediately upon contact with the rounder, which improves indexing gate transfer efficiencies and reduces the number of doubles in the intermediate prover. Prom the moulder bars a driven kicker bar transfers the dough pieces onto the zig-zag board. On the zig-zag the dough pieces pass down an incline from the moulder. A fine dusting of flour falls onto the zig-zag and each dough piece is evenly coated in a thin film of flour. The dough pieces are assembled again in a row and transferred into a tray of prover pockets by a synchronized rotary gate system. The first proof allows the dough pieces to relax sufficiently for sheeting or forming. At the end of proving a row of balls of dough are inverted and are then discharged into what are known as closed clam shell gates. The latter ensure that the dough balls enter (when the clam shells open) the adjustable sheeting rollers at the same time, which allows an even row of sheeted or slightly flattened dough pieces to be transferred into the indented pans (after the sheeting rollers, additional equipment can be fitted, e.g. a finger pressure board, which moulds the dough pieces into a hot dog or finger shape). The pans are fed by conveyor under the sheeting unit and a pan stop and indexer system synchronizes each row of indented pans just under the discharge conveyor. Flour recovery and pan shaker units The tray of buns then passes through a unit which employs targeted jets of compressed air to just lift each row of buns, whilst an extraction unit removes unwanted excess flour from the surface and importantly from the base or heel of each dough piece. An adjustable pan shaker is then employed to ensure that the dough piece is in the centre of each indent. At the start of a run the pans are likely to be cold and will require a higher setting on the pan shaker to centralize each dough piece. Once the pans have been round a plant and through the oven and become warm, the dough piece tends to move more easily in silicone-treated pans, and consequently lower pan shaker settings are required. Proving Large-scale high-volume hamburger bun manufacture usually employ a proof and bake system. Baking pans are moved by a track into a conveyorized prover. With this system, pans are supported either by a device in the centre of each tray or by a magnet. A track then transfers the pans into the oven. Stevens (1991) describes this type of system as an endless conveyor system. Prior to entry to the prover the space between each baking pan is monitored. Within the prover the track bends in an oval and gradually travels to the top, crosses over and then down again. Pan spacing is essential if the edges of the pans are not to collide as the track bends. {{page:221}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS The prover temperature and relative humidity are adjustable. Typical settings for hamburger buns are of the order of 38°C (lOO.4°F) and 78% relative humidity, for a proof time of between 50 and 55 min depending on the weight of the bun. Proving time is altered by changing the speed of the track. Seed application After an appropriate proof time, the track with indented pans full of proved dough pieces leaves the prover. If the buns are to be covered with sesame, other seeds or grits, the pans of proved dough pieces are passed through a water mist to give a fine and even covering of water. Immediately after this, seeds are evenly distributed onto the top surface of the proved buns. Two systems are available for adding seeds. In the first, after water misting the pan activates the vibration of a tray of sesame seeds held at an adjustable height above the pans. The base of the flat hopper of sesame seeds is perforated and the vibration releases seeds onto the top of the tray of buns. The time during which the tray vibrates and the degree of vibration are adjustable. These adjustments will alter the weight of seed applied. The second system uses the pan indents to activate a mandrel or a grooved spindle, housed in the base of a hopper of sesame seeds. As the spindle revolves, seeds are released onto the top surface of each row of dough pieces. Whichever type of seed applicator is used, it is important that they are positioned correctly and level and that the correct settings are made appropriate to the seed and product to ensure an even coating on the top surface of the buns. Finger rolls can be partially slit down the centre by a water splitter. The pressure of the water in the jets is adjusted to alter the depth of each cut or split. Baking The pans of fully proved, seeded buns are then transferred onto an oven track, and the spacing or distance between each pan is again metered to ensure the correct spacing for the bends in the oven. The metered pans then enter into a conveyorized oven. Within a gas oven the pans pass over adjustable ribbon burners. The various layers of track are divided into six controlled temperature zones. In each zone the temperature is adjustable. In addition to the ribbon burners, fans are used to increase hot air circulation, to ensure an even heat distribution. Typical baking temperatures for hamburger buns are of the order of 220°C (428°F) for 7.5-9.5 min depending on the weight of the product on the line. Further details on conveyorized proofing and baking systems are given by Wells (1983) and Grogan (1980). Depanning and cooling After baking, the track passes under a depanner unit. Compressed air is used to loosen the buns from the tray, and a vacuum unit removes some of the surplus {{page:222}} seeds. A belt which is as wide as the tray of buns, made up of special soft depanning cups, is employed to remove the buns from the tray. Through each cup an adjustable vacuum is employed. The cups gently suck the buns off the tray and place them onto a cooler. Typically, a stainless steel spiral cooling conveyor is used. The cooling of buns takes in the order of 20 min, during which they are cooled to 35-38°C (95-100°F) before slicing. From the cooler the buns are aligned into six lanes, and bunches of five rows are then sliced and packed into a pillow pack possibly with a central seal to give 2 x 15 buns in each pillow pack. The date-coded pillow packs are then passed through a metal detector and placed on cleaned trays which may be automatically stacked, ready for dispatch from the production area. For most products, a double layer of buns in pillow packs are added to each tray. The bottom layer should have the same characteristics as the top layer. The bottom layer should not show any signs of compression (typically known as 'crow's feet'). Further details of slicing and packaging are given by LeCrone (1994). The baking pans are then conveyorized back to the Pan-O-Mat via an in-line tray cleaning system. As an aid to keeping these high-volume plants clean, the baking pans are not greased at all but are treated with a non-stick material. Various non-stick pan coatings are available. Typical materials are silicone glazes, rubberized silicone and fluoropolymers. Schneeman (1995) discusses the advantages and disadvantages of each material, while Moss (1987) reported on a survey of pan coatings and baking surfaces. Part-baked breads Introduction Part-baking is a term used to describe a method of bread manufacture which involves two stages of baking. Other terms include partially baked, par-bake, brown-and-serve and two-stage baking. During the first stage, dough pieces are baked just to the point when they are 'set', traditionally without colour formation of the crust. Mter cooling, packaging and distribution, the uncoloured partially baked dough pieces are given a second bake. During the second bake, a crust is formed and coloured. Additionally, the characteristic aroma of baked bread is produced. The second bake can be carried out close to the point of sale or consumption. Products which are usually part-baked are yeasted buns and rolls and laminated Danish pastries and croissants. Kamel and Stauffer (1993) state that 'part-baking is most successful with products which have a large surface area in relation to crumb area, such as baguettes, where the heat can penetrate quickly to the crumb centre to set it without setting the crust'. Valentino (1994) reports the suitability of partbaked pizza crust. Pyler (1988) describes how General Mills, Inc., introduced a new baking process called 'Brown-N'Serve' in 1949. Turner (1970) describes the highvolume production of partially baked rolls in the late 1940s. {{page:223}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS Use afpart-baked bread The manufacture of freshly baked crusty bread from a traditional single baking process produces a very desirable product. The facilities required to carry this out are, in outline: • delivery of raw material - access and storage; • manufacturing floor space; • breadmaking equipment - weighing, mixing, scaling, moulding, pans, proving, baking and cooling; • a trained workforce. Establishing all these facilities near to the point of sale or consumption is not always feasible. Part-baked bread, manufactured in a bakery sited near an industrial area and distributed close to the point of sale, can be an attainable way of producing a regular supply of hot crusty bread. The minimum equipment requirements to produce coloured crusty loaves and the aroma of fresh bread are a small bake-off oven, often sited behind the counter and in view of the consumer. With minimum effort new batches of hot bread can be produced every 20 min throughout most of the day. The convenience of part-baked breads allows small retail shops to offer hot bread for sale, for example butchers and even mini shopping stores attached to garages. Brittain (1996) states that 'Different outlets use bake-off in different ways. Its rise in non-bakery related outlets such as garage forecourts and butchers continues unabated'. Baking off part-baked bread can be a solution for catering establishments wanting to offer customers crusty hot bread and rolls, whatever the demand, throughout their hours of opening. Some hot bread is also enjoyed in the home. Supermarkets and food shops offer for sale part-baked breads for the consumer to purchase and finish in domestic ovens. Manufacture of part-baked breads Similar plant operations are required to make both 'traditional' bread and partbaked bread. Some modifications to the formula to increase the stability or rigidness of the part-baked dough pieces are recommended. For part-baked French bread Bonnardel et al. (1990) suggested a slight reduction in the amount of water added at the dough stage. A slightly tighter dough is recommended to encourage the product to maintain a circular cross-section as opposed to one which is oval in appearance. Stear (1990, p. 707) states that dough water absorption must be reduced to give a stiff dough which will remain rigid on removal from the oven. Additionally, Stear suggests a moderate reduction in yeast and yeast food to avoid excessive oven spring. These recommendations are also given by Pyler (1988). Both Pyler and Stear state that straight doughs require higher mixing temperatures, in the range 32.2-35°C (90-95°F). Presumably, in order to facilitate plant handling the reduced dough water absorption suggested {{page:224}} must offset the dough softening which is associated with such high ex-mixer temperatures. Stoecklein (1995) gives an up-to-date definition of partbaked as 'baking beyond the point of starch gelatinization to some 90 to 95% completion in terms of desired crust colour and crispness'. Stoecklein states that absorption, as a general rule, will be slightly higher in part-baked products compared to frozen doughs (except in traditional hearth-baked items). The definition given by Stoecklein would appear to be similar to three-quarters-bake, part-baked bread which is described later. The bread improver employed could be one with a higher level of ingredients which will offer greater dough piece stability, e.g. DATA ester. Baking nets Bonnardel et al. (1990) state that the use of baking nets with deep, flexible, rounded corrugations, in which the dough pieces can sit, are found to contribute towards maintaining the shape of a dough piece, as opposed to inflexible baking pans with shallow ridges. Baking nets can be used to support part-baked French breads during cooling and freezing. Proving and baking Kamel and Stauffer (1993) describe two baking methods to achieve minimum crust formation and colour. First, a low temperature for the normal baking time may be used. This requires a reduction in proof time (or a reduction of yeast level) to take account of the resultant increase in loaf volume caused by the delay in the dough piece 'setting'. Second, a high temperature bake may be used to set the dough structure quickly, followed by removal from the oven before the crust has set or coloured. For French breads a shorter final proof time is suggested (Bonnardel et ai., 1990). A less aerated, lower volume dough piece is found to favour the maintenance of the part-baked bread's structure. Longer final proof times produce partbaked breads with higher volumes and lower stability. It is recommended that the top surface cutting of dough pieces made from tighter doughs, with less final proof time, should be a little deeper. The objective of the first bake is to obtain a sufficiently rigid semi-finished product which has an uncoloured surface. Two types of baking are given: (1) high temperature and short time and (2) low temperature and long time. The ideal first bake for French breads is a two-stage process. For example, in a rack oven, during the first stage dough pieces are placed into a steam-filled oven at high temperature for a short time, typically 3 min at 2700e (518°F) to open up the cuts. The second phase is a lower temperature bake for a longer time, typically 7 min at 2500e (482°F) to ensure that the centre of the dough pieces have been transformed from dough into 'set' bread. The temperature profile of 170 g half-baguettes was followed during part-baking or just to the beginning of crust formation. They found that just after 8 min of {{page:225}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS baking at 235°e (455°F) the centre temperature had reached approximately 87°e (188.6°F), whilst the temperature on the edge of the dough piece had nearly reached 1000e (212°F). Pyler (1988) states that in order to avoid shrinkage and collapse on cooling the internal temperature ex-oven must exceed 76.7°e (170°F) and should preferably reach 82.2°e (l80°F). To achieve this products must be baked at between 121.1 and 148.9°e (250-300°F) for as long as possible without causing crust colour. Turner (1970) stated that 90.6°e (195°F) was the proper internal temperature of part-baked rolls. For maximum rigidity and volume, without crust formation, a 10-15 min bake at a steady 1400e (284°F) to a core temperature of 82°e (179.6°F) is given by Stear (1990). Fetty (1966) describes the use of microwave energy in the production of partbaked products. A reduction of final proof time to 30 min is required. The optimum internal temperature of microwaved part-baked breads required to set up the cellular structure was 88°e (190°F). The average of the core temperatures above stated is 84°e (183.3°F). The exact temperature of an oven for baking off part-baked bread will vary with each type of oven and the size of each batch. Oven conditions during the first bake will vary additionally with the size and shape of the dough pieces. A pragmatic approach to determining the optimum conditions during the first baking period is to adjust the baking time and temperatures until the disappearance of an unbaked ring in the centre of the dough piece, without the formation of crust and colour. Depanning and cooling Part-baked bread contains a much higher moisture level than fully baked bread. Bonnardel et al. (1990) report weight losses for part-baked bread after the first baking and cooling of only 13.5% compared to up to 22.5% for fully baked French bread. The higher moisture content of part-baked products makes them susceptible to mould growth (Kamel and Stauffer, 1993). Strict plant hygiene procedures should be implemented to reduce mould contamination. Turner (1970) states that it is possible to minimize mould problems by using 0.25% (based on flour weight) mould inhibitor in the dough. Additionally, the use of an oil spray containing 1.3% calcium propionate is described. Vacuum cups on depanning units are recommended to be cleaned several times per day with a good germicide solution. Hickey (1980) suggests spraying a 1-1.5% potassium sorbate solution on hot part-baked products as a method of doubling or tripling mould-free shelf life. Storage of part-baked breads The shelf life of part-baked bread without any further processing is limited. With storage at room temperature, surface drying, rapid staling and an increased risk of surface mould development limit the shelf life to 24--48 h (Bonnardel et al., 1990). {{page:226}} Modified atmospheric packaging (MAP) or gas flushing considerably extend the mould-free shelf life of part-baked bread stored at room temperature. This method is usually employed in the retail sector. MAP involves sealing the partbaked product in a moisture-proof, airtight packaging material. Before the package is sealed, the air (and thus oxygen) is replaced or flushed out with an atmosphere of carbon dioxide and nitrogen. The resultant anaerobic sealed environment cannot sustain aerobic metabolism of microorganisms. During storage at ambient temperature an increase in crumb firmness or staling occurs. The second bake is used to reverse the staling process and the crumb regains the softness associated with fresh bread. Pool (1991) gives a shelf life expectation for brown-and-serve rolls packed in MAP of up to 3 months and for croissants of 15-25 days. Freezing of part-baked bread Freezing of part-baked bread stops the process of staling and the development of mould. Additionally, freezing hardens the product, giving stability to an otherwise fragile product. Freezing can be carried out in a blast freezer operating at -40 ± 5°C (-40°F ± 9°F). 'Shock freezing' can be used in which a liquid carbon dioxide or nitrogen spray is used to freeze rapidly a thin layer of bread. This forms a barrier against moisture migration and increases rigidity before slower freezing down to -20°C (-4°F) (Bonnardel et at., 1990). After the freezing process the part-baked products are packaged in cardboard boxes with an inner sealable polythene liner. Frozen storage follows at -18°C (-O.4°F). No moisture loss was reported in part-baked bread stored under these conditions for 7 weeks. Second and final baking Final baking brings about the following four changes: • a dry crisp crust is formed and coloured; • the aroma of baked bread is produced; • the crumb of the product is refreshed reversing the process of staling (Kamel and Stauffer, 1993); • the volume of French bread is reduced by 13-15%. Bonnardel et al. (1990) first reported loaf shrinkage during final baking after their investigation into part-baking of French bread. A final bake-off temperature of 210°C (410°F) for 10 min is given for a frozen part-baked halfbaguette. The recommended baking temperature of UK retails sales of part-baked bread is almost universally stated as 220°C (428°F), and variations are given in time depending on size and whether the product is fresh or frozen. {{page:227}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS Quality of the final product When correctly baked, quite acceptable bread and rolls can be produced after the second bake, and products are enjoyable when eaten before they firm up. With appropriate training of the person carrying out the second bake, it is possible to maintain an evenly coloured crusty product. However not following closely the recommended baking procedure can lead to pale-looking unappetizing bread and rolls. In addition to the reduction in volume of French bread reported above, other quality factors are altered after the second bake. Kamel and Stauffer (1993) state that it is widely recognized that the crumb of re-baked part-baked bread stales quickly. The refreshed crumb stales at a higher rate than the crumb of a freshly baked product. They recommend that part-baked bread should be consumed fairly quickly after rebaking. Stoecklein (1995) states that 'the overall quality of par-baked products is not necessarily superior to that of scratch products, or of products made from frozen dough. Because a reheating stage is required for par-baked products, the most significant quality problem facing par-baked goods is their moisture loss and its impact on the appearance and eating quality of the finished product. Its shelf life is very limited, and its consumption should take place shortly after reheating'. The final bake of part-baked bread is out of the control of the bakery that produced it. Concern over wide variations in the interpretation of when the second bake is complete has led to the introduction of what is known in the UK as three-quarters-baked products. The baking of three-quarters-bake products is greater than conventional part-baking and is sufficient to give some crust colour. Three-quarters-baking reduces the possibility of pale-looking underbaked bread being produced after the second bake. The final bake of three-quarters-baked items is really a reheating process. Stoecklein (1995) states that the final preparatory stage prior to product use is more in the nature of reheating (of products part-baked to 90% completion) at temperatures of 204°C (400°F) for 10 min, for example, depending on the type of product and the consumer's preference. The Milton Keynes Process A variation on the theme of part-baking is the development of a process which evolved after a request from a UK supermarket to see 'if it was possible to provide ambient preformed bread with qualities that would be enjoyed by the customer'. A partnership of four companies evolved: the supermarket, a plant baker, a machinery manufacturer and a bread improver and yeast manufacturing company. The process is described as being composed of 'the uniting of several elements' (Kear, 1995). The main difference between this process and traditional part-baking is the claim that the ambient shelf life extension is, before the final baking, from 5 to 12 days (Anon., 1995; Kear, 1995; Grindley, 1996; Macdonald, 1996; Milton Keynes Process). {{page:228}} Prior to dough mixing, part of the flour can be fermented in either a liquid brew or as a plastic sponge. Kear (1995) states that 'Tweedy high speed pressure/vacuum mixers are used to mix pan breads while French sticks and morning goods are produced on spiral mixers' . The process involves subjecting dough pieces to baking conditions of low temperature and a long time duration, so arranged that the crumb of each piece is fully baked, but crust formation is incomplete, steam being applied to maintain humidity and prevent dehydration of the crust (Anon., 1995). Kear (1995) describes this as 'a crumb conditioning stage'. During this stage, crust caramelization is minimized as the dough piece is fully formed. Immediately after the first baking or period of heat transfer the pale/white loaves, whilst still in the pans (in the case of pan bread), are cooled under vacuum. Kear (1995) describes this process thus, 'the bread then goes to a stabiliser where the negative pressure stabilises the product against collapse when cooled'. The principle of vacuum cooling of baked products involves the reduction of pressure or the evacuation of the atmosphere which contains the hot baked product, down to a relatively high vacuum. As a result of this reduced or sub-atmospheric pressure, the temperature at which water is converted into steam is greatly reduced. The heat of the product provides energy to convert water into steam; as this happens the temperature of the baked product is rapidly reduced. Cooling rates are rapid and an 800 g loaf can reach a core temperature of approximately 30°C (84°F) in a time of 4-5 min. After vacuum cooling and depanning, the surface of the part-finished product may be sprayed with a preservative to suppress mould growth. The patent which covers the 'Manufacture of baked farinaceous food stuffs', describes how this preservative could be removed by volatilization in the final baking step in the process (Anon., 1995). It is possible that the rapid cooling associated with vacuum cooling has a beneficial effect on starch crystallization, in terms of altering the rate or progress of starch retrogradation (APV, personal communication, 1996). A combination of the use of enzymes that reduce the rate of firmness of the crumb of bread and vacuum cooling possibly contributes to the extension of shelf life at ambient temperature, from the staling point of view, and the preservative spray would increase the mould-free shelf life. Kear (1995) states that the preformed product can be packed and sent out, under ambient conditions, to stores where baking takes place in an oven and the crust is caramelized. The finished loaf, according to Kear, is of superior quality to part-baked breads, and is slow to stale. Newbery (1996) describes, in an article on 'vacuum cooling', an in-store baking breakthrough which fulfils the demand for bakery foods that can be baked within minutes at the point of sale with simple equipment. A revolutionary new technology allows a wide variety of high-quality breads and rolls to be produced without in-store batching, mixing or make-up. No freezer storage, {{page:229}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS thawing or proving is required. After 10 min in the in-store oven, the foods, it is claimed, will retain their freshness for a normal 3-4 days. It has been reported (Anon., 1996) that 'the equipment manufacturer and the supermarket have developed a small forced convection oven specially for baking Milton Keynes products in-store. The system provides consistent final bake-off conditions. Simple colour-coding allows the in-store oven to be operated at the predetermined temperatures and time settings'. Yeasted laminated products Introduction The main yeasted laminated products are croissants and Danish pastries. Both would appear to have their origin in the seventeenth century. Rijkaart (1984) describes how in 1615 the law in Vienna only allowed bakers of bread to make products containing yeast. Bread bakers made Danish pastry, which is described as puff pastry with added yeast. In Denmark, Danish pastries are called 'Wienerbrot' or the 'pastry from Vienna'. Asklund (1965) gives a further account of the history and evolution of Danish pastries. Montagne (1961) states the origin of the croissant was in Budapest and dates from 1686. Bakers working during the night gave alarm when they heard the noise of what were to be Turkish invaders who had dug underground passages to reach the centre of the town. The bakers who had saved the city were awarded or granted the privilege of making a special pastry. The pastry had to take the form of a crescent, in the shape of the emblem on the Ottoman flag. Formulations Published formulations of croissants and Danish pastries indicate that both usually contain nine major ingredients: flour, salt, water, yeast, shortening, sugar, egg, milk solids and laminating margarine or butter (note that egg may be one exception, which may not be added to some croissant formulae). Cauvain and Tellocke (1993) surveyed 36 Danish pastry and 14 croissant formulations and concluded that the two products have similar 'average' essentials, although, they say, the proportion of individual ingredients can vary substantially. Table 9.4 shows a comparison of the mean or average proportion of ingredients from the survey carried out by Cauvain and Tellocke (1993). Examination of Table 9.4 indicates some general trends. Danish pastries contain lower proportions of salt and higher proportions of yeast, sugar, egg and laminating margarinelbutter. The same general trend is found in Table 9.5 which compares croissant and Danish pastry formulations in standard American and UK textbooks. {{page:230}} Table 9.4 The mean or average proportions of ingredients from a survey of 14 croissant and 36 Danish formulations (Cauvain and Tellocke, 1993) Flour (%) Croissant Danish pastry Flour 100 100 1.3 Salt 1.8 Water 52.2 43.6 Yeast (compressed) 5.5 7.6 Shortening 9.7 9.6 Sugar 9.2 6.1 Egg 2.6 12.4 Skimmed milk powder 5.4 6.5 62-64 Laminating margarine/butter 50-57 Table 9.5 Comparison of an English and an American formulation for Croissants and Danish pastries Croissant Danish pastry Brownb Brownb % flour Sultan' Sultan' Flour 100 100 100 100 1.1 Salt 2 1.8 1.56 Water 52 55.4 52 50 Yeast (compressed) 5 4 6.25 6 Shortening 8 2 12.5 6.3 10 2 25 Sugar 9.4 24 nil Egg 25 5 4 S milkpdr 5 3 6.25 Margarine/butter 45 32 50 50 for lamination 'Sultan (1989), USA. bBrown (1985), UK. Ingredients Fully automatic make-up plants are available that can produce 12 000 curved croissants and 14 000 straight croissantslh (Sasib, 1996). Rijkaart (1984) describes croissant machines producing 800-24 000 croissantslh (followed by manual bending and placing the croissant on trays with the slot down). For such plants it is very important to have a knowledge of and control over the raw materials. Flour protein Rowe (1985) states that the best results are consistently obtained from croissants manufactured with a flour with good protein at a level of about 11.5-12.5%. He concludes that most bread flours can be used successfully by making proper adjustments. Rowe found that substituting 30% of the bread flour with lower {{page:231}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS protein cake flour produced croissants with lower volume. The interior was finer and had a more bread-like grain, and the layering was not as well defined. (Many references discuss the addition of lower protein flour for Danish pastry; this may be due to a requirement to dilute or adjust the protein of very strong North American flours.) Rijkaart (1984) states that the optimum type of flour (containing bromate) has approximately 12-13.5% protein. Cauvain and Tellocke (1993) examined the effect of gluten fortification of flour and found that weak low-protein flours are unsuitable for Danish pastry and croissant production. Weak flour doughs were rather extensible and proved to a lower height and spread more during proof, thereby producing flatter pastries. Stronger flours had a greater ability to withstand the effect of paste lamination and the adverse effects of yeast. They concluded that medium to strong flour, or weaker flours with added dry vital wheat gluten, can be used to make Danish pastry and croissant with acceptable product qualities. Tellocke (199Ia) concluded that puff pastry doughs made with weaker flours pass through the optimum elasticity ranges faster and require shorter resting periods than those made with stronger flour. Doughs made from stronger flours need longer resting periods to avoid excessive pastry shrinkage and distortion, unless their dough has received intensive mixing. It would appear that flour protein levels for laminated products will be plant specific. Higher protein flours might be more suited to make-up plants with appropriate methods of relaxation employed. Fat addition to the base dough Cauvain and Tellocke (1993) reported the effects of dough fat addition. Based on flour weight, up to 15% of butterfat or plain shortening or 16.6% laminating margarine were mixed into the base dough. Mixing 3-6% fat into the dough was found to improve the paste machinability by increasing the elastic properties of dough slightly which in tum increased the paste recovery after sheeting. Higher fat levels caused the croissants to be flatter and the crumb structure to become more closer grained and 'bun-like'. The only difference found between the fats was that the butterfat imparted a yellow colour to the crumb and a pleasant butter flavour to the pastry, especially at higher levels. Rowe (1985) states that increasing the amount of margarine or butter will result in a softer croissant. Smith (1990) states that if it is desirable to add quantities of fat higher than 25% to a sweet dough, then it must be rolled and folded into the finished dough rather than adding it with other ingredients at the mixing stage. This they state is the main difference between regular sweet dough and Danish pastry. Tellocke (1991a) found that certain emulsifiers could be used to reduce the fat level in puff pastry. He states that the addition of diacetyl tartaric acid esters (DATA esters), sodium stearoyllactylate (SSL) or glycerol monostearate (GMS) to the base dough, or a blend of GMS, lecithin and sorbitan monostearate to the laminating fat, increased the tender eating quality of puff pastry. {{page:232}} Sugar levels Cauvain and Tellocke (1993) found that the addition of sugar at levels between 5 and 12% (flour weight) gave optimum pastry quality. Higher levels inhibited yeast activity and reduced pastry lift. Danish pastries with 18% sugar tended to distort in shape and croissants tended to uncurl and show signs of internal collapse. Yeast levels Optimum pastry quality was produced with a yeast level of 7.5% (flour weight) with a dough temperature of 19-20°C (66-68°P) and a proof time of 60 min at 31°C (86°P). Increasing yeast levels (and proof time) caused croissants to assume a flatter external appearance with a more open crumb structure. Yeast contributes to a pleasant flavour and gives a tender eating character to the pastry (Cauvain and Tellocke, 1993). Rowe (1985) gives three typical croissant formulae with 7% yeast addition in each. Poehlman (1979) states that much Danish pastry is made using active dried yeast. He states that reconstituted active dried yeast seems to have a beneficial reaction within the Danish dough system. In the discussion of the paper he stated 'you have a larger percentage of inactive dry yeast in it (dried yeast) due to the drying process which seems to have a beneficial effect on machinability'. This was assumed to be due to the presence of glutathione (a reducing agent) in yeast which gives more dough extensibility. Laminating or roll-in fat Vey (1986) suggests a classification of 'enrichment' of Danish pastry based on the level of roll-in or laminating fat. To every 100 parts by weight of base dough the following parts would be added for: 12.5-17 Lean Danish (2-2.75 oz/lb of base dough) (3-4.5 oz/lb of base dough) Medium Danish 18-25 26-35 (4.75-5.5 oz/lb of base dough) Rich Danish Smith (1990) gives the following guide based on flour as 100%: Lean Danish 30 Medium-rich Danish 40 Rich Danish 50 Very rich Danish 70 Rowe (1985) states that the selection of proper roll-in fat is very important, taste and processing being the two important aspects in croissant production. The storage or conditioning of the fat at the correct temperature is important. If the roll-in fat is too warm and soft, it will not spread evenly and will tend to be {{page:233}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS absorbed in the dough. The resultant croissants have reduced volume and a poorly defined interior crumb and layering. Roll-in fat which is too hard will not spread evenly and results in variable shape, size and layering. The roll-in fat should be stored in a cool place. Consistent results are obtained when the temperature of the roll-in fat before lamination is about 15.6°C (60°F) with a dough temperature of l2.6-15.6°C (55-60°F). Rijkaart (1984) states that the butter temperature should be no more than 14°C (57.2°F) and shortening up to 18°C (64.4°F) with a dough temperature from a high-speed mixer of 24-25°C (75.2-77°F). Vey (1986) states that regular bakers' or pastry margarine containing between 16 and 19% water have become the most popular roll-in shortening for Danish pastry production, produced by hand or semi-automatic systems. Problems have developed with these shortenings containing moderate amounts of water, with newer extruding and laminating systems. Anhydrous margarine containing minimal water and the same plastic range as regular bakers' or pastry margarine is favoured. The improved functionality of the anhydrous margarine allows usage levels of up to 25% less than regular bakers' margarine. Vey (1986) reported that roll-in shortening for Danish pastry must have a putty-like consistency. Tellocke (199lb) states that in order to avoid irregular layer formation in puff pastry and variation in pastry lift and shrinkage, the roll-in or laminating fat or margarine should be plasticized prior to lamination of the paste. The best paste and pastry qualities were obtained with uniform fat crystals no greater than about 5 f.llll in diameter within an optimum solid fat index (SDI) of between 38 and 45%. Cauvain and Tellocke (1993) state that for croissant and Danish pastries, the firmer the laminating fat the more resistant the paste to deformation after sheeting. If the solids content and the firmness of the laminating fat are too high, pastry expansion is restricted during proof and the final specific volume is low. They found that a fractionated butter was soft, greasy and difficult to machine at 20°C (68°F). Fat layers in the paste were partially destroyed during lamination and croissant specific volume was low. When used at lOoC (50°F) the butterfat gave a firmer paste, layering remained intact and pastry specific volume remained high. Their investigation suggested that for fermented laminated products it is more important that the roll-in or pastry margarine is reasonably firm and plastic during lamination but relatively soft during proof to assist pastry expansion. Smith (1990) states that butter is considered to be the best of all shortenings from the flavour standpoint but, due to its cost, low melting point and short plastic range, it finds limited use as the total roll-in fat. Blends of butter with high melting point fats make very good Danish pastries. Ashlund (1965) states that for Danish pastry 'summer butter, also called grass butter, is not suitable for rolling' . The amount of solid fat in butter varies throughout the year and even during some months, as feeding regimes change. Figure 9.1 is a plot of the percentage solid fat at 10°C (50°F) of butter throughout the year, for the period 1985-87. It {{page:234}} shows the considerable variation in the % solid fat between summer and winter months. Typically during summer months butter has a lower content of solid fat at lOoe i.e. between 35 and 42%, whereas in the winter months the percentage of solid fat is higher at 42-50%. Figure 9.2 shows the percentage of solid fat determined by NMR on samples of winter and summer butteroil at temperatures between 0 and 35°C. A similar trend of higher content of solid fat is found in winter butter throughout the temperature range. The important practical interpretation of these graphs is that winter and summer butter should be stored, conditioned and used at different temperatures. Kazier and Dyer (1995) describe an investigation into 'reduced-fat pastry margarine for laminated dough in puff, Danish and croissant application'. Attempts at fat reduction by lowering the amount of laminate were not feasible. However, by reducing the fat content of the laminate roll-in margarine, the system developed allowed a 1: 1 replacement of the control roll-in shortening. Reduced-fat versions of croissants and Danish had slightly higher post-bake moisture and slightly larger volumes. The finished products using the reducedfat system appeared to be softer and more tender compared to their control. Dough mixing The basic methods available for mixing doughs for fermented laminated products are (1) low-speed straight dough, (2) high-speed straight dough and (3) the blitz system or Scotch or Dutch method. In any of these three systems, ,---------------------------------------------r 55 I 50 1ii ~ 45 "0 ~1llll5 rn __ 1986 ~ ~ ...... 1987 ~ 40 ~ "- 35 30 13 o ~ IMonth Figure 9.1 Seasonal vanatlOn III percentage of solId fat at lO'C (50'F) for UK-produced butterOlI (courtesy D Lawrence, DaIry Ingredients (UK) Ltd, Slough, UK) {{page:235}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS 70,----------------------------------------------. 60 50 it ::; ~ ~ 40 Summer -:J__ Winter 20 10 o~--------------------------------------------~ 25 20 30 iO 15 35 10 19861 Temperature °C 1987 Figure 9.2 Variation in percentage of solid fat with temperature for UK-produced butteroil (courtesy D. Lawrence, Dairy Ingredients (UK) Ltd, Slough, UK). proportions of the flour can be made into a sponge and fermented prior to final dough mixing. The degree of dough mixing and development will be plant and process specific and will depend on the characteristics required in the final product. Rijkaart (1984) found from experience that vertical high-speed mixers with mobile bowls were ideal for croissant dough. A 1 min mix without too much gluten development to the dough is described, further development being carried out during the lamination process. A mixer with a capacity of 136 kg (300 lb) of dough gives 2 tonnes of finished product per hour. The high-speed mixer is described with a 30 kW (40 horsepower) motor which drives the mixing arms at speeds up to 380 rpm. High-speed doughs after lamination are stated as being less prone to shrinkage. Vey (1986) described a conventional, retail Danish pastry dough after mixing as being very slack and underdeveloped. In a second method, the 'blitz system' (Scotch method in the UK, Dutch in some parts of Europe) roll-in shortening is combined in the mixer with semi-mixed dough. The roll-in shortening is mixed with the dough to give a random dispersion. Rowe (1985) states that the low-speed mixing time for croissant doughs is generally 5-15 min and depends on the characteristics desired in the croissant. Pyler (1988) describes how, when doughs are to be extruded, some adjustments to doughs are required to counteract the adverse effects of the greater abuse that is inherent in the process. These include making a sponge of up to 75% of the flour, increasing absorption by 1-3%, extending dough fermentation time {{page:236}} by 30 min, maintaining a yeast level of 5% in the sponge and an additional 3% at the dough stage. Poehlman (1979) states that there is controversy about the amount of mixing and development and the desirable dough temperature of Danish pastry. Some advocate long mixing and warm doughs, while others advocate short mixing and cold doughs. Both he says are right, depending on the product line. For a mixed production [in terms of size, 56.5 g (2 oz) and large 340-453 g (12-16 oz) Danish coffee cake] he believes that a short, cool mixing provides the best overall performance. For best performance at make-up, the proper temperature for Danish dough is 12.6 -15.6°C (55-60°F). Asklund (1965) emphasizes that, in the production of traditional Danish, the dough should literally be mixed and not kneaded. Methods of adding the roll-in or laminating fat to the dough Five methods of adding the roll-in or laminating fat to the dough are described as: • French or English; • Blitz, Scotch or Dutch method; • Coextrusion; • Sandwich; • Curling. With the French or English method, roll-in fat is placed on part of the sheetedout dough. The remaining dough is then folded over the roll-in fat to give, in the French method, one layer of fat surrounded by dough. The English method, after the first fold, gives two layers of fat and three layers of paste. In the blitz or Scotch method, previously described, optimum pastry quality is influenced by the amount of mixing of the complete paste. Pastries produced by this method after lamination have lower lift than those made by the English or French method (Tellocke, 1991a). Co-extrusion described by Rowe (1985) and Vey (1986) involves the extrusion of a cylinder of paste. A layer of roll-in fat is co-extruded on the inside of the cylinder of paste. The co-extruded cylinder is then passed through sheeting rollers to flatten the cylinder into a sheet of one layer of roll-in fat surrounded by dough. With the sandwich system a continuous sheet of dough is extruded onto a moving conveyor. Roll-in fat is then extruded onto the base layer. A top layer of dough is then extruded onto the roll-in fat. The curling process as described by Rijkaart (1984) employs just one layer of dough onto which a layer of roll-in fat is extruded. Diagonally across the belt on which this is travelling, a curling roller causes the paste to form into a cylinder. The cylinder takes the form of a giant swiss roll with six layers of roll-in fat and seven layers of dough. The number of layers can be altered by decreasing or {{page:237}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS increasing the thickness of the extruded base dough and roll-in fat. Increasing the depth of paste and roll-in fat gives fewer layers in the swiss roll. Lamination Cauvain and Tellocke (1993) examined photomicrographs of pastes with and without yeast. They found that, after final sheeting, small bubbles were retained in the layers of the yeasted paste. During proof these bubbles expanded and the layered structure was largely destroyed. The bubbles reduced pastry lift by creating holes in the gluten sheets in the dough layers. Bakers try to avoid this destruction of dough layers by giving less lamination to Danish and croissant pastes, compared with puff pastry. Danish and croissant pastes are usually laminated to give between 20 and about 50 fat layers, while in puff pastry there are between 130 and 250. Cauvain and Tellocke recommend, for Damsh and croissant doughs, lamination to give between 18 and 32 fat layers. Rijkaart (1984) states that 36 layers of butter is more than enough for croissants and that in Europe the number of layers varies from 16 to 48. Rowe (1985) showed that croissants with 16 layers have a larger volume, and are flakier with an open grain with a decided lacey effect and pronounced layers. Increasing the number of layers to 48 reduces flakiness and volume and the grain becomes more bread-like. After lamination has been carried out, individual pastries are produced. Useful references on the numerous varieties of Danish pastries are given by Poehlman (1979) and Asklund (1965) and major books covering practical baking. References AMF (1995) Bun and roll make-up systems (leaflet) Anon (1995) Manufacture of baked farinaceous food stuffs Patent WO 95/30333 Anon (1996) The Milton Keynes Process Food Trade Revlew, 66(8), 546 Asklund, DO A (1965) Damsh pastry productIOn, m Proceedzngs of the 21st Conference of The Brztlsh Chapter, pp 22-32 Bonnardel, P, Maitre, H and POitrenaud, B (1990) Part-baked technology of French bread Notes from FMBRA conference, Uszng Refrzgeratzon zn the Bakery, 6 December 1990 BnUam, J (1996) Bake-off boom Bakers' Revlew, September, 24 Brown, J (1985) ReCipe and processmg, m The Master Bakers Book of Breadmakzng, TurretWheatland Ltd, Herts, UK, Chapter 8 (2nd editIOn 1995) Cauvaln, S P and Tellocke, G W (1993) Damsh pastnes and crOissants FMBRA Report No 153, August Charbonneau, T , Gonzales, R and Gorton, L A (1978) LiqUid ferment system feeds double bun Ime at central bakery Produces 6000 Ibs/ hr of 65% sponge Bakzng Industry, Apnl, 24-6 Doerry, W T (1985) LiqUid preferments A study of factors affectmg fermentatIOn parameters and bread quahty Amencan Institute of Baking, Research Department Techmcal Bulletm, VII, June, pp 1-9 DubOIS, D (1984) Salt m the brew of a liqUid ferment, effect on processmg and quality of white pan bread Amerzcan Instztute of Bakzng, Research Department Techmcal Bulletzn, VI, March, 6 Fetty H (1966) MIcrowave bakmg of partIally baked products ProceedznRs of The Amerzcan Soclety of Bakery En[?zneers, 145-52 {{page:238}} Gnndley, E (1996) Made m MIlton Keynes Bakers' Review, January, 16-17 Grogan, P E (1980) Conveyonzed proofing and bakIng systems Proceedings of The Amencan Society of Bakery Engineers, March 4, 113-20 HIckey, C S (1980) Sorbate spray applIcatIOn for protectmg yeast-raIsed bakery products Bakers' Digest, 54(4), 20-2, 36 Kamel, B S and Stauffer, C E (1993) Advances In Baking Technology, Blackle AcadeIll1c & ProfessIOnal, Glasgow Kazler, H and Dyer, B (1995) Reduced-fat pastry marganne for laIll1nated dough m puff, DanIsh and crOIssant applIcations Cereal Foods World, 40(5), 363-5 Kear, H (1995) The MIlton Keynes Process, m Proceedings of the 79th Conference of the Brltlsh Society of Baking, November 1995 Kulp, K (1983) Technology of brew systems m bread manufacture Bakers' Digest, November 8, pp 20-3 LeCrone, D J (1994) SlIcmg and packagmg 1,000 buns per mmute, m Proceedings of the Amencan SOCiety of Bakery Engineers, pp 145-51 Macdonald, S (1996) MIlton Keynes patent m the publIc domam Bntlsh Baker, January 26 Matz, S A (1992) Baking Technology and Engineering, 2nd edn, Van Nostrand RemholdJAVI, New York, pp 603-7 The MIlton Keynes Process (Leaflet) The MIlton Keynes Process, MandevIlle Dnve, Kmgston, MIlton Keynes, MKIO OAP, UK Moss, T M (1987) A survey of pan coatmgs and bakIng surfaces, m Proceedings of the 64th Conference of the Bntlsh Society of Baking, March, pp 5-9 Montagne, P (1961) Larousse Gastronomlque, The Encyclopedw of Food, Wine and Cooking, 1st edn, Harnlyn PublIshmg Group Neufeld, K (1991) MIcrowave bakIng Proceedings of the American Society of Bakery Engineers, 77-84 Newbery, D (1996) Vacuum coolIng Proceedings of the Amencan Society of Bakery Engineers, 81-6 Poehlman, R W (1979) PreIll1um Damsh pastry Proceedings of the American Society of Bakery Engineers, 91-105 Pool, H (1991) ModIfied atmosphere packagmg Proceedings of the Amencan SOCiety of Bakery Engineers, 159-65 Pyler, E J (1988) Baking SCience and Technology, Sosland PublIshmg, Kansas CIty, KS, USA RIJkaart, C (1984) CrOIssant productIOn Proceedings of the Amencan SOCIety of Bakery Engineers, 137-44 Rowe, C S (1985) CrOIssants Proceedings of the Amencan Society of Bakery Engineers, 154-64 Saslb Bakery (undated, receIved 1996) RIJkaart crOIssant curlIng and bendmg machme (leaflet) Schneeman, H L (1995) Proceedings of the Amencan Society of Bakery Engineers, 65-7 SIll1th, R Z (1990) Sweet dough and Damsh BakIng ProductIOn and Technology, SeIll1nar, Amencan InstItute of BakIng, Honolulu, January 29-31 Stear, C A (1990) Handbook of Breadmaklng Technology, ElseVIer SCIence PublIshers, Amsterdam Stevens, E (1991) 1,000-per-Ill1nute bun Ime Proceedings of the Amencan Society of Bakery Engineers, 125-37 Steward, CD (1990) The latest m bun dlVlders Proceedings of the Amencan Society of Bakery Engineers, 100-10 Stoecklem, R C (1995) Frozen par-baked products Proceedings of the Amencan SOCiety of Bakery Engineers, 49-54 Sultan, W J (1989) Pracflcal Baking, 5th edn, Van Nostrand Remhold, New York Sutherland, WR (1974) What IS pH and TTA? Proceedings of Southern Bakers' Conference, Atlanta, GeorgIa, September 8 Sutherland, W R (1976) pH and TTA m bakmg Proceedings of the Amencan Society of Bakery Engmeers, 85-98 Sutherland, R (1989) Hydrogen IOn concentratIOn (pH) and total tltratable aCIdIty tests American Instltute of Baking, Research Department Bulletin No XI, May, 5 Thompson, DR (1983) LIqUId sponge technology applIed to hIgh speed dough Ill1xmg Bakers' Digest, 8 November, 11-17 Tellocke, G W (l991a) Puff pastry I Process and dough mgredlent vanables FMBRA Report No 144, January {{page:239}} SPECIALITY FERMENTED GOODS Tellocke, G W (l991b) Puff pastry II Fats, margannes and emulsifiers FMBRA Report No 146, August Turner, J E (1970) PartIally baked foods Proceedmgs of the Amencan SocIety of Bakery Engmeers, 74-83 Valentmo, F (1994) Par-baked pizza Proceedmgs of the Amencan SocIety of Bakery Engmeers, 153-8 Vey, J E (1986) Damsh Proceedmgs of the American SocIety of Bakery Engmeers, 111-20 Watkms, F H (1991) High-flour liqUId ferments Proceedmgs of the American SocIety of Bakery Engmeers, 168-78 Wells, B (1983) Proofmg and bakmg systems Proceedmgs of the American SocIety of Bakery Engmeers, Il9-25 {{page:257}}
