---
book: "Technology of Breadmaking"
book_slug: "cauvain-technology-of-breadmaking"
author: "Stanley P. Cauvain & Linda S. Young"
lang: "en"
relevance: "core"
chapter: "Chapter 10: Bread spoilage and staling"
heading: "Chapter 10: Bread spoilage and staling"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 10: Bread spoilage and staling"]
order: 10
source_page: 257
tokens_est: 15269
---

# Chapter 10: Bread spoilage and staling

{{page:257}} IRENE M.e. PATERAS Introduction Bread is the most important staple food in the Western world and it is recognized as a perishable commodity, which is at its best when consumed 'fresh'. Unfortunately, bread remains 'fresh' for only a few hours after it leaves the oven. During storage it is subjected to a number of changes which lead to the loss of its organoleptic freshness. The factors that govern the rate of freshness loss in bread during storage are mainly divided into two groups; those attributed to microbial attack, and those that are result of a series of slow chemical or physical changes which lead to the progressive firming up of the crumb, commonly referred to as 'staling'. Microbiological spoilage of bread The most common source of microbial spoilage of bread is mould growth. Less common, but still causing problems in warm weather, is the bacterial spoilage condition known as 'rope' caused by growth of Bacillus species. Least common of all types of microbial spoilage in bread is that caused by certain types of yeast. Mould spoilage Mould spoilage of bread is due to post-processing contamination. Bread loaves fresh out of the oven are free of moulds or mould spores due to their thermal inactivation during the baking process (Ponte and Tsen, 1978). Bread becomes contaminated after baking from the mould spores present in the atmosphere surrounding loaves during cooling, slicing, packaging and storage. The environment inside a bakery is not sterile because dry ingredients, especially flour, contain mould spores, and flour dust spreads easily through the air. It has been estimated that 1 g of flour contains as many as 8000 mould spores. In some bakeries a similar number of spores settle on 1 m2 of surface every hour (Doerry, 1990). Production operations such as weighing and mixing of ingredients increase the mould count in the air. In larger bakeries where segregation is possible, the flour handling areas are separated from the cooling and packaging area of the finished bread. © Thomson Science 1998 {{page:241}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING Bread crust is rather dry and if the relative humidity of the atmosphere is below 90%, moulds will not grow on it. Also, moulds are relatively slow to develop, so that in dry climates the surface of a slice of bread may dry before mould growth is sufficient to be visible. In a humid atmosphere, however, and especially on a loaf inside a wrapper, moulds will grow rapidly. This is true especially if the bread is wrapped hot from the oven so that droplets of water condense on the inside surface of the wrapper. When bread is cut, the inner, more susceptible surfaces are exposed to mould infection. Sliced, wrapped bread is more at risk, because the moist, cut surfaces are an ideal substrate for moulds to grow on and the packaging prevents the moisture loss. The rate of mould growth in various breads depends on the recipe and the processing method (Seiler, 1992). Brown and wholemeal (wholewheat) breads appear to become mouldy rather earlier than white breads because mould growth is more clearly visible on the darker surfaces. Cultured breads, such as rye bread (Chapter 13), tend to have a slightly longer shelf life because of their increased acidity and lower pH. The processing method has also been shown to have an effect on the rate of mould growth. For example, bread made from no-time dough, i.e. CBP and ADD, has a slightly shorter shelf life than bulk-fermented bread. This difference is considered to be largely due to the higher alcohol content in fermented breads. The most common bread spoilage moulds are Penicillium spp., although Aspergillus spp. may be of greater significance in tropical countries (Legan, 1993). In wheat breads a wide range of spoilage moulds including Penicillium, Aspergillus, Cladosporium, Mucorales and Neurospora have been observed (Table 10.1). Rhizopus (nigricans) stolonifer is the common black bread mould. It has very fluffy appearance of white cottony mycelium and black sporangia. Neurospora Table 10.1 CharactenstIcs of bread moulds Colony colour Colony Comments Mould appearance PemcIlllum spp Flat, spreads Blue/green The most common type of bread mould rather slowly AspergIllus mger Black Fluffy, spreadmg Frequently present AspergIllus flavus Ohve green With spore heads AspergIllus candldus Cream often clearly AspergIllus glaucus VISible Pale green Cladosponum spp Flat, spreads Dark ohve green Often present on damp slowly bakery walls, commonly encountered Neurospora sltophlla Very fluffy and Will grow very rapidly Salmonpmk fast spreadmg on mOist bread RhlZopus mgncans Greylblack Very fluffy and Will grow very rapidly Mucorspp Grey fast spreadmg on mOist bread Source Seller, 1992 {{page:242}} sitophila is another type of mould which is reddish in colour, and is found in bread stored at a high humidity or wrapped while still warm. Storage temperature has an effect on the type of moulds growing in bread. Aspergillus spp. was reported to be the dominant mould spoilage of bread in India, while the 90% of moulds isolated from a range of bread in Northern Ireland were Penicillium spp. (Legan, 1993). In addition to spoilage, some moulds present a severe risk to public health because they can produce mycotoxins. Exposure to mycotoxins can occur either directly by eating bread spoiled by mycotoxigenic moulds or indirectly as a result of people consuming the products of animals fed contaminated bread. Mycotoxins are very resistant and can survive the heating process designed to kill moulds. It has been reported that 10% of Aspergillus spp. and Penicillium spp. are toxic to mice (Silliker, 1980). As a significant amount of mould growth is needed to form mycotoxins in bread, the risk to public health from mycotoxins in developed countries is minimal (Legan, 1993). The consumer today tends to reject the whole loaf rather than cut away the visibly mouldy portion and eat the remainder, as was common in the past. The indirect risk via animals fed on mouldy bread is also very low (Osborne, 1980). Bacterial spoilage Rope is a spoilage problem of bread and other bakery products that have high equilibrium relative humidity (ERH), i.e. greater than 90%. It is caused by a mucoid variant of Bacillus subtilis or Bacillus licheniformis. The causative organism, Bacillus subtilis, appears naturally in the soil and thus rope bacteria may be present on the outer parts of grains and vegetables. It can also be present in the air and may be carried as an aerosol in dust in the bakery environment. The primary source of contamination is from raw ingredients that may be present in or on the equipment. Almost any of the ingredients used in the production of bread may contribute the organisms, but flour and equipment that previously have been in contact with contaminated dough are the greatest offenders. According to Clark (1946), rope occurs during hot and humid weather. The spores easily survive baking and germinate and grow within 36-48 h inside the loaf to form the characteristic soft, stringy, brown mass with an odour of ripe pineapple or melon. This is due to the release of volatile compounds including diacetil, acetoin, acetaldehyde and isovaler-aldehyde which contribute to the typical sweetish odour of rope (Legan, 1994). The bacteria are heavily encapsulated, which contributes the mucoid nature of the material. As spoilage progresses, bacterial amylase and proteases degrade the bread crumb, causing discoloration and development of stickiness. At this stage the crumb stretches into long silky threads which give rise to the name 'rope'. Conditions favouring the appearance of rope are (l) a slow cooling period or storage above 25°C (nOp), (2) pH above 5, (3) high spore level and (4) a moist loaf. The water activity inside a loafis marginal for {{page:243}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING B. subtilis growth so that rope may appear in localized areas where the moisture content is high. However, rope is now rare, because the addition of calcium propionate, good hygiene (sanitation) and good bakery practice keep it under control. Yeast spoilage Many of the complaints regarding off-odours in bread, when not due to rope, are associated with yeasts. Contamination with wild yeasts is rare in bread made using a short process, but can sometimes occur when long fermentation sponges or doughs are employed (Seiler, 1993). Yeasts, like moulds, do not survive the baking process, but bread can become contaminated with yeasts during the cooling and slicing operations. The main sources of contamination is through physical contact with dirty equipment or infected high-sugar foods, which are a perfect substrate for osmophilic yeasts. There are mainly two types of yeasts involved in the spoilage of bread (Legan and Voysey, 1991). • Fermentative yeasts. Sugars present in bread are fermented by these yeasts. The spoilage is manifested by the development of an 'alcoholic' or 'estery' off-odour depending on the species of yeast present. Many different types of yeast are capable of growing on bread and causing such defects but Saccharomyces cerevisae, which is the bakers' yeast, tends to be encountered most often in bread. • Filamentous yeasts. These are commonly referred to as 'chalk moulds' because they form a white, spreading growth on the surfaces of bread which can readily be confused with mould growth. They are considered as yeasts rather than moulds since they produce single cells and reproduce by budding. There are a number of different chalk moulds, but the most common and troublesome is Pichia burtonii which has the ability to grow very fast on bread and has proved to be more resistant to preservatives and disinfectants than many other moulds. Control of microbiological spoilage Preservatives. The preservatives most commonly used in bread to prevent or minimize microbial growth are the propionates, i.e. propionic acid and its salts (Chapter 3). Organic acids such as propionic acid act by distorting the pH equilibrium of microorganisms (Wagner and Moberg, 1989). The depression of the internal cellular pH by ionization of the acid molecules leads to the elimination of substrate supplies into the cell, causing inhibition of the microbial growth (Jay, 1992). The anti-microbial activity of propionates is mainly against moulds and the bacteria responsible for the development of rope in bread. Because their effectiveness on yeasts is minimal, propionates can be used in bread without {{page:244}} disturbing the leavening activity in the dough (Beuchat and Golden, 1989). The types of propionates used in bread with their recommended levels of use are listed in Table 10.2. Another substance with effective preservative action in bread is ethyl alcohol. The addition of ethanol at levels between 0.5 and 3.5% of loaf weight leads to a substantial extension of the shelf life of bread (Legan, 1993). Seiler (1984) has demonstrated that the mould-free shelf life of loaves treated with alcohol increases with ethanol concentration, since a 50% extension in life is achieved with a 0.5% addition of ethanol based on loaf weight (Figure 10.1). Similar increases in shelf life were obtained when the same amount of ethanol was sprayed over all surfaces of the loaf prior to packaging and sealing as when it was added to the base of a bag of the same size before adding the product and sealing. This finding confirms that ethanol acts as a vapour pressure inhibitor. Sensory tests have indicated that a level of addition higher than 1 % by product weight might be unacceptable by the consumer (Seiler, 1984). Despite the high cost of duty paid, ethanol has real potential as a bread preservative not only because of its anti-microbial activity but also its ability to delay staling. The storage of food in atmosModifIed atmosphere packaging (MAP). pheres of increased concentration of carbon dioxide is referred to as modified atmosphere. The application of MAP in bakery products became of interest in the late 1970s, mainly in Europe because new labelling regulations demanded that the presence of preservatives should be declared. In contrast, carbon dioxide did not need to be declared. In addition, there was a need for greater increases in shelf life than were possible using propionates. Packaging in carbon dioxide has the advantage that it can increase the shelf life of bread without affecting its flavour, aroma or appearance. A carbon dioxide atmosphere is effective in retarding the development of moulds when present in concentrations greater than 20% (Seiler, 1984; Inns, 1987). At concentrations near to 100% the anti-microbial effect of carbon dioxide is maximized through anaerobiosis. Table 10.2 AntI-mould agents most commonly used III bread Recommended level AntI-mould agents of use (%)' 01 ProPIOnIC aCid 02 CalcIUm propIOnate SodIUm propIOnate 02 02 SodIUm dlsproplOnate (70% solutIOn) ,% of flour weight Source Seller, 1985 {{page:245}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING 250 ~ 200 ai .!: "' CI) ... ~ 150 "0 :; 0 E 5; CI) 100 ~ ~ () 5; 50 >R 0 % by weight of 95% ethyl alcohol Figure 10.1 RelatIOnship between alcohol concentratIOn applied and percentage Increase In mouldfree shelf life (source Seller, 1984) It has been shown that the higher the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere within the package, the greater the extension of the mould-free shelf life (Seiler, 1984). Studies carried out on British bread have indicated a shelf life extension of 100, 200 and 300% in packed atmospheres of 40, 60 or 90% carbon dioxide by volume (Seiler, 1984, 1989). The effect of carbon dioxide on the mould-free shelf life of products is ERH dependent. Bakery products such as cakes, with ERH values of 85% or below, can obtain 400% extension in their shelf life in atmospheres of 75% or above of carbon dioxide. In bread-type products, which have an ERH higher than 90%, when a high concentration of carbon dioxide is present the achieved extension is about 250% (Figure 10.2). A mixture of two gases, carbon dioxide and nitrogen, has also been used as a means of preventing package collapse, which can happen as carbon dioxide is absorbed into the product when it is used in its pure form. A gas mixture of 60% carbon dioxide and 40% nitrogen has been found to be the most suitable (Ooraikul, 1982). The main methods of wrapping products under modified atmosphere conditions are (Seiler, 1984): • Form-fill sealing, where the air is replaced by a continuous stream of gas and prior to the sealing of the package. The advantages of this system are the speed of the operation, versatility and the ability to adjust to different product sizes and wrapping materials. The disadvantage is a significant tendency towards gas leakage at the point of seal. The control of sealing pressure, time and temperature is absolutely necessary to avoid this gas leakage. {{page:246}} Storage 500 ERH Product temp (OC) (%) + Madeira cake 85 21 ++ x Madeira cake 27 83 + Crumpets + 94 27 0 4001 0 Part-baked Bread + 91 21 t. Fruit pies 27 95 • Rye bread slices ++ 92 21 • Part-baked rolls + 21 88 ~ ~ ~ + + 2 ;= ..... 300 )( )( Qi ~ II) )( )( 00 Q) )(+ + ~ J> :!2 0 ::J Ie + 0 Ie 0 E + 200 c 0 + Q) : II) o [] ell J> 0 • • ~ J> • u c • Ie • • Ie • 0 0 • • J> + )( • ••• • 100 o J> )( • • + • • • I • •• • 01 20 40 60 80 100 0 Average carbon dioxide concentration (% by volume) Figure 10.2 Increase in mould-free shelf life of various products with different carbon dioxide concentrations in the headspace of the pack (source: Seiler, 1984). • Vacuum packaging, where the air is removed by creating a vacuum inside a partially sealed package, followed by the addition of the desired gas mixture. This is a less flexible system which requires a two-step approach to replace the air. However, this method can attain an equilibrium carbon dioxide concentration within the package approaching 100% and can even produce gas-tight seals between the lid and the base. The application of gas packaging in bread-type products is mainly limited in high-value bread-type products intended to have long storage life because of the {{page:247}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING cost of gas, special wrapping equipment and the laminated films used in the process. Irradiation. Irradiation is used as a means of destroying mould spores which may present on the surfaces of bread. The types of irradiation of primary interest in bread preservation are ultraviolet, microwave and infrared (Seiler, 1983). Ultraviolet irradiation. Ultraviolet (UV) light is a powerful anti-bacterial agent with the most effective wavelength being about 260 nm. UV light is used to control the occurrence of mould spores on bread. The poor penetrative capacities of UV light limits its use to surface applications. Direct UV irradiation is used to treat the surfaces of wrapped bakery products, leading to useful increases of the mould-free shelf life. The important advantage of UV light is that it does not generate heat to destroy wrapping films or promote condensation problems. The disadvantages are that it is difficult to treat a multi-surfaced product as mould spores in the air cell walls within the bread surface are protected from the irradiation. There is also the risk of exposure and it is necessary to shield the UV light from workers' eyes (Seiler, 1989). Microwave radiation. Microwaves lie between the infrared and radio frequency portion of electromagnetic spectrum. The main advantage of microwave heating is that microwaves heat rapidly and evenly without major temperature gradients between the surface and the interior of homogeneous products (Potter, 1986). Seiler (1983) reported that wrapped bread can be rendered mould-free by heating in a microwave oven for 30-60 s, which is the time required for the surface to reach 75°C (167°F). The use of microwaves as a means of bread preservation is limited by the heating effect which results from their use. This can cause condensation problems which can adversely affect the appearance of the product. Infrared radiation. Infrared treatment can be used to destroy mould spores on bread by heating surfaces to the desired temperature of 75°C without adversely affecting the quality and appearance of the product or the integrity of the packaging material (Seiler, 1968). The time required to reach this temperature depends on the thickness of the packaging material, the nature of the product and the distance between the infrared projector and the surface of the product. The advantage of infrared radiation over microwaves and UV is that it is necessary to heat only the outside surfaces, which minimizes problems due to condensation or air expansion. One disadvantage is that it is quite costly for multi-sided products which are required either to rotate between heaters or to be treated in two separate ovens (Seiler, 1983). {{page:248}} Bread staling The term 'staling' refers to the gradually decreasing consumer acceptance of bread due to all the chemical and physical changes that occur in the crust and crumb during storage excluding microbial spoilage (Betchtel et al., 1953). The result of these changes is a product which the consumer no longer considers 'fresh'. Staling is detected organoleptically by the changes in bread texture, as well as in taste and aroma. The processes that cause staling actually begin during cooling, even before starch has solidified sufficiently for the loaf to be cut. Bread staling is mainly associated with the firming of the crumb. During storage, the crumb generally becomes harder, dry and crumbly, and the crust becomes soft and leathery. Quite often, these changes are solely attributed to the drying out of the crumb. However, the mechanism of crumb firming during storage is far more than a simple moisture redistribution from crumb to crust. The overall staling process is mainly part of two separate subprocesses (Guy et al., 1983): the firming effect caused by moisture transfer from crumb to crust, and the intrinsic firming of the cell wall material which is associated with starch recrystallization during storage. Crust staling During the storage of bread, the moisture content of the crust increases as a result of moisture migration from the crumb to the crust. With an initial moisture content of only 12%, the crust readily absorbs moisture from the interior crumb, which has a moisture content about 45%. It has been reported (Czuchajowska and Pomeranz, 1989) that during a storage period of 100 h, the crust moisture increased from 15 to 28%, while the crumb moisture loss was only from about 45 to 43.5%. In a zone near the crust the decrease was much more pronounced, from about 45 to 32%. Wrapping of bread loaves in moisture-proof film accentuates crust staling by preventing evaporation of moisture that has migrated to it from the centre crumb. It must be said, however, since packaging slows down the rate of crumb staling by preventing excessive drying and minimizing the total moisture loss from the product into the atmosphere, that loaves are usually wrapped as soon as they cool. Generally, crust staling is less objectionable to consumers than the age-related firming of the crumb. Role of the main bread components in crumb staling Starch. The changes that especially starch polymers undergo during the baking process and during storage determine the structure, textural properties and keeping quality of bread. A loaf of bread consists of about 50% starch, 40% water and 7% protein. The main ingredients of bread are flour and water, with {{page:249}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING small quantities of fat, salt, various improvers and yeast. Starch is the major component of flour, being about 75% of the material and plays an important role in the structure formation, physical properties and keeping quality of bread. Bread will stale even when there is no net loss of moisture from the loaf. The mechanisms of bread staling have been studied for over a century. As early as 1852, the Frenchman Jean-Baptiste Boussingault, a pioneer in the study of nitrogen fixation, showed that bread could be hermetically sealed to prevent it from losing water, and yet still go stale. He further established that staling could be reversed by reheating the bread to 60°C (140°F), the temperature region at which, we now know, starch gelatinizes in bread. Early researchers emphasized the role of starch in the staling process. The most comprehensive studies on changes in ageing bread were carried out by Katz (1928), in his effort to counteract staling to eliminate the need for night baking in Dutch bakeries. Katz utilized an X-ray diffraction technique to demonstrate that starch in bread retrograded with time in a manner similar to that of a starch gel. He concluded that starch was involved in increased starch crystallinity, and thus starch was mostly responsible for crumb firming. Since the work of Katz, much of the work on bread staling has concentrated on the gelatinization and retrogradation behaviour of the starch fraction. A brief description of these processes is in order at this point. Starch gelatinization. Starch occurs as roughly spherical granules. The starch polymer consists of two structurally distinct polysaccharides: amylose and amylopectin. Amylose is an essentially linear polymer, apparently amorphous, containing approximately 4000 glucose units. Amylopectin - the partially crystalline component - is a multi-branched polysaccharide composed of approximately 100 000 glucose units. In the starch granules the polymer chains are held by crystalline junction points in a rigid network. Schoch (1945) separated and described the properties of the amylose and amylopectin fractions of starch. Native starch granules are not soluble in cold water but, when heated in an aqueous medium, will absorb water and swell. Initially, swelling is reversible but it becomes irreversible as temperature is increased, and the granule structure is altered significantly. As temperature increases, the starch polymers vibrate vigorously, breaking intermolecular bonds and allowing their hydrogen bonding sites to engage more water molecules. The water penetration leads to an increased separation of starch chains, which has an effect in increasing the randomness and decreasing the number and size of crystalline regions. Continued heating results in complete loss of crystallinity. At this stage the viscosity of the system is very close to that of a near-solid system, as the melting temperature (T m) value is exceeded. This point is regarded as the gelatinization point or gelatinization temperature. In bread it is the setting temperature, when the viscous dough changes to a solid sponge. In most baked products the starch crystallites melt at between 60 and 90°C (l40-194°F). {{page:250}} On cooling, all the polymers begin to lose mobility as the baked crumb cools and the viscosity increases. In bread, textural properties such as firmness will be determined by the concentration of polymers, particularly starch and the temperature. The state of starch granules in the final loaf may range from being almost fully gelatinized to a complete loss of order and with variable degrees of exudation of granular polysaccharide (mainly amylose). The exuded polysaccharide would behave physically as a rubber while the amylopectin internal to the granule would likewise be in rubbery (flexible) state. At water contents greater than 20-30% w/w, such as that of bread, this would lead to retrogradation. Starch retrogradation. The predominant mechanism of staling is the time-dependent recrystallization of amylopectin from the completely amorphous state of a freshly heated product to the partially crystalline state of a stale product. Starch retrogradation is a process in which gelatinized starch molecules reassociate to form a double helix crystalline structure. An implicit requirement of starch recrystallization is the availability of sufficient moisture, at least locally within the matrix, for mobilizing long polymer chain segments. The rate and extent of starch recrystallization are determined primarily by the mobility of the crystallizable outer branches of amylopectin (Schoch and French, 1947; Ring et aI., 1987; Russell, 1987). Water plays a very important role because it acts as a plasticizer. A plasticizer is a 'material incorporated in a polymer to increase polymer's workability, flexibility or extensibility' (Levine and Slade, 1990). Water is unique in that role because of its low molecular weight. Schoch and French (1947) proposed a model that describes the heatreversible aggregation of amylopectin as the principal cause of bread staling (Figure 10.3). They suggested that granule swelling is restricted by the limited water available in bread dough, so that swollen granules retain their identities as discrete particles. With increasing swelling the linear amylose fraction becomes more soluble and diffuses into the aqueous phase, forming a concentrated solution. Immediately on cooling, this solution of amylose molecules associates by hydrogen bonding and rapidly retrogrades to set up an insoluble gel, contributing to the loaf structure. This gel is considered to remain stable during further storage and not to participate in the staling process. As illustrated in the Schoch Figure 10.3 Mechanism of bread staling (source: Schoch and French, 1947). {{page:251}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING and French model (Figure 10.3), amylose quickly associates in bread soon after baking, affecting initial firmness, but plays no further role in crumb firming. This firming is attributed to changes in the physical orientation of the branched amylopectin molecules of starch within the swollen granule. In fresh bread, the branched chains of amylopectin are unfolded and spread out within the limits of available water. These chains of the amylopectin polymer gradually aggregate, aligning with one another by various types of intramolecular bonding. This effect results in increasing rigidity of the internal structure of the swollen starch granules causing crumb hardening. Ghiasi et al. (1984) investigated the effect of varying the ratio of amylose to amylopectin on the bread firming rate. They found that on day 1 of storage the high amylopectin breads (ratio of 83.4% amylopectin to 16.6% amylose) were less firm than the control (ratio of 75% amylopectin to 25% amylose), but by days 3 and 5 the firmness of high amylopectin breads was equal to that of the control. This demonstrates that amylose retrogradation occurs rapidly and that any subsequent firming does not involve the amylose fraction. When waxy barley starch (100% amylopectin) was used to replace normal maize starch in a reconstituted bread dough, bread loaves collapsed on cooling (Hoseney et al., 1978). This finding suggests that the amylose fraction is predominately responsible for the setting of crumb structure. Although a qualitative correlation exists between extent of starch retrogradation and the increased firmness of the bread crumb (Eliasson, 1985), the correlation changes significantly when different bread recipes are considered. Factors that complicate the real situation include the degree of starch granule swelling, hydration of starch, the level and type of saccharide ingredients, moisture content, the presence of solutes (salt and sugar), the presence of flour hydrocolloids (pentosans) and the effects of various lipid materials. This confirms that coexistent phenomena contribute to the overall increase of firmness. Gluten. Although starch recrystallization is the major component of bread crumb firming, there is reported evidence that some other mechanisms may also have a role in the staling phenomenon. Many investigators have supported the view that gluten proteins participate in the staling process. It has been suggested (Martin et al., 1991; Martin and Hoseney, 1991) that hydrogen bond interactions between the -OH groups of protruding starch chains with the -NH2 groups of protein fibrils increase in number and cumulative strength through storage time as the crumb loses kinetic energy, resulting in increasing crumb firmness. According to Kim and D'Appolonia (1977a,b) there is, in general, an inverse relation between protein content and staling during storage of bread. Bread made from strong flour, forming gluten of adequate quantity and quality, has a higher volume and a slower rate of staling compared to bread made with weak flour. This finding was later confirmed by He and Hoseney (1991), who reported that {{page:252}} gluten from poor-quality flours interacts more strongly with the starch granules than does the gluten from good-quality flours. This means that bread from poorquality flours would be expected to firm at a more rapid rate. Willhoft (1973a) suggested that the anti-firming effect of increased protein is due to the dilution of the starch component and an increase in loaf volume effected by gluten enrichment. Water redistribution. The redistribution of moisture during bread storage and its contribution to staling has been a controversial subject. Willhoft (1973b) suggested that crumb firming involved a loss of moisture from the gluten to the starch phase, whereas Cluskey et al. (1959) supported the view that moisture must migrate from starch to gluten in staling bread. Wynne-Jones and Blanshard (1986) demonstrated that 'bound' water increased slightly upon ageing of bread while 'free' water decreased. This finding was taken as an indication that moisture from gluten is moving to the crystalline starch structure. Leung et al. (1983) suggested that as starch changes from the amorphous state to the more stable crystalline state, water molecules become immobilized as they are incorporated into the crystalline structure, resulting in decreased water mobility during the ageing process. Slade and Levine (1987) proposed a possible explanation to the controversy of the direction of moisture migration within the bread crumb. They suggested that the recrystallization of amylopectin within swollen starch granules leads to the development of a partially crystalline structure with B-type crystalline regions. Water must migrate within the crumb to the developing crystalline regions. The B-type starch crystal is a higher moisture crystalline hydrate than is A-type starch and requires the incorporation of more water molecules into the crystalline region while starch chain segments are realigning. Once incorporated within the crystal, water is no longer available as a plasticizer of the starch-gluten network, nor can it be perceived organoleptically. As a result, bread loses softness and develops a drier mouth feel. Rogers et al. (1988) have shown that retrogradation (due to amylopectin) could be affected by the presence of water, which would result in a variable firming rate. They found that bread crumb firms more rapidly under conditions where starch does not retrograde and concluded that starch retrogradation and crumb firming do not correlate with each other across varying moisture contents. Staling inhibitors Losses which result from bread staling are of great economic importance, especially under conditions of industrialized and centralized production. Thus considerable attention has been focused on this problem and much research effort has been expended on understanding the mechanisms by which certain groups of ingredients retard the staling process or minimize its effect. {{page:253}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING Enzymes The addition of alpha-amylases to the dough has been shown to retard crumb firming (Miller et al., 1953). During baking, amylases partially hydrolyse starch to a mixture of smaller dextrins. The alpha-amylase enzymes cannot access intact starch granules, thus they essentially hydrolyse damaged starch by attacking alpha-(1,4) linkages along starch chains. This action is stopped at alpha- (1,6) branch points of amylopectin. Below 55°C (131°F) the activity of alpha-amylase is minimal and depends on the amount of damaged starch in the flour. Between 58 and 78°C (136-172°F) gelatinizing starch is rapidly attacked, with the rate of conversion slowing down above this temperature range because of enzyme denaturation. Bacterial alpha-amylase affects bread crumb firmness more than fungal or cereal alpha-amylase because it is more heat stable than the other two types. The thermo stability of added alpha-amylases decreases in the following order; bacterial > cereal (malt) > fungal (Herz, 1965; see also Chapter 3). As much as 20% of the initial bacterial enzyme activity can survive the baking process. The use of alpha-amlyase enzymes results in the formation of increased amounts of dextrins which can be extracted from the bread crumb. The amount of soluble dextrins present in the crumb is an indicator of the thermo stability of the enzymes used. The shorter-chain dextrins of a particular low degree of polymerization (DP 3-9) are presumably responsible for the anti-firming effect (Martin and Hoseney, 1991). These mobile dextrins may interfere with and prevent the development of hydrogen bonds between starch granule remnants and the continuous gluten network. This action prevents the development of entanglements between starch and protein which increase the rigidity of the crumb. Lineback (1984) observed that bread made with bacterial alpha-amylase remains soft for longer than 'normal' bread. They suggested that the lower molecular weight branched dextrins have a decreased ability to retrograde or interfere with retrogradation in some manner, thus reducing the extent of firming. Comparison of the X-ray patterns of fresh and stored breads has indicated that the order of decreasing degree of starch crystallinity was bread with bacterial alpha-amylase, bread with fungal alpha-amylase, bread with cereal alphaamylase, and unsupplemented bread (Dragsdorf and Varriano-Marston, 1980). Dragsdorf and Varriano-Marston (1980) observed that in bread supplemented with bacterial alpha-amylase, an A-type crystal pattern was obtained, whereas in the other supplemented breads the B-type crystal pattern was formed. They also noted that the crystallization of starch did not follow the change in firmness and reported that starch crystallinity and bread firming were not synonymous. The discrepancies between X-ray diffraction data and firmness results arise because the different types of crystals influence the distribution of water within the crumb differently. The A-type crystal contains eight water molecules, whereas the B-type crystal contains 36 water molecules. As a result, in breads {{page:254}} amylopectin recrystallization develops B-type crystalline regions and the crumb is firmer because more water has migrated into the crystalline region. This water which participated in the formation of the crystal is no longer available as a plasticizer of the starch-gluten. Macroscopically, the lack of the plastisizing effect from water results in firmer bread which is perceived as being drier (Slade and Levine, 1987). Emulsifiers Emulsifiers are used in bread as means of maintaining crumb softness for longer by retarding the process of staling. The emulsifiers that are widely used for their ability to reduce the staling of the bread crumb are distilled, saturated monoglycerides. Other types of emulsifiers that are effective as crumb softeners are sodium stearoyl-2-lactylate (SSL) and diacetyl tartaric acid esters of monoglycerides (DATA esters), although generally not to the same degree as monoglycerides (Tamstorf et al., 1986). The anti-staling ability of emulsifiers is mainly due to their interaction with starch but the exact mechanism is still unexplained. Emulsifiers complex with linear amylose, and they may do some complexing with the outer linear branches of amylopectin (Knightly, 1977). It appears that the formation of an emulsifier and amylose complex contributes to a decrease in the initial firmness of the crumb, while a complexing with amylopectin results in a distinct reduction in the rate of firming during storage (Knightly, 1988). Research studies have shown that when emulsifiers are added to a starch gel or to bread, the DSC (differential scanning calorimetry) endotherm due to recrystallization of amylopectin is decreased (Russell, 1983a,b; Eliasson, 1983). However, it has been demonstrated that the final extent of retrogradation is not changed by the addition of emulsifiers, but the staling process proceeds at a much slower rate (Krog et al., 1989). According to Rao et al. (1992), although emulsifiers inhibit the process of amylopectin recrystallization, they have no effect on the cellular mechanical properties of bread as measured by recoverable work. This means that emulsifiers have an effect on crumb softness but do not interfere with changes in the rigidity and elasticity of the cell walls in baked bread. Distilled monoglycerides are used as anti-staling agents in the form of hydrates. These are suspensions of monoglyceride crystals (beta-form), usually 20-25% in water, with a creamy texture which make them easily dispersible in dough. Blends of saturated and unsaturated monoglycerides in the form of fine powder are also available and can be added directly to the dough. Pentosans Pentosans, which are non-starchy polysaccharide materials, are a minor component of wheat flour present at the 2-3% level, roughly half water-soluble and {{page:255}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING half water-insoluble. The presence of pentosans tends to reduce the tendency of the starch components towards recrystallization because they are highly hydrophilic and absorb six or seven times their weight in water. A number of researchers have investigated the effect of pentosans on staling rates and concluded that they retard starch retrogradation, especially the waterinsoluble fraction (Kim and D'Appolonia, 1977c,d; Jankiewicz and Michniewicz, 1987). They suggested that pentosans affect the extent ofretrogradation by reducing the amount of starch available for retrogradation in the system. The water-soluble fraction appeared to interact with the amylopectin, and the insoluble fraction with both the amylose and amylopectin (Kulp and Ponte, 1981). Alcohol It is generally accepted that breads produced from processes involving a bulk fermentation step have longer shelf life than do products from 'no-time' accelerated processes (Chapter 2). This is mainly due to the presence of larger quantities of alcohol which is a product of longer periods of yeast fermentation in bulk-fermented doughs. Studies carried out on the effect of ethanol on the firming of bread have shown that the crumb modulus of bread which has been treated with ethanol increases during storage at a slower rate than that of untreated 'control' loaves (Figure 10.4). DSC has been used to follow changes in the rate of development of an endotherm associated with the starch fraction of bread during ageing, as a result of ethanol treatment (Russell, 1982). The loaves were treated by painting their surface with ethanol after they had been baked and allowed to cool. The rate of development of the staling endotherm caused by the recrystallization of starch was lower for bread treated with alcohol than for the untreated control. For comparison, crumb compressibility measurements were carried out and the ~ 200 ~ .0 r -- - - - - - alcohol treated - control 200 300 100 400 Time. h Figure 10.4 Effect of alcohol treatment on the extent of starch recrystallIzatIOn dunng storage (as expressed by the endothenn area per mg of bread) (source Russell, 1982) {{page:256}} results confirmed that alcohol-treated bread exhibits a reduced rate of crumb firming paralleled by changes observed by DSC in the starch fraction of the bread crumb. The manner in which the alcohol exerts its 'anti-staling' effect is uncertain, although it has been suggested that ethanol can complex with amylose and the linear exterior branches of amylopectin to prevent retrogradation (Erlander and Erlander, 1969). Sugars and other solutes Sugars are also known to function as anti-staling ingredients in starch-based baked goods (Cairnes et al., 1991). I'Anson et al. (1990) investigated the effect of sucrose, glucose and ribose on the retrogradation of wheat starch gels at the nominal starch:sugar:water ratio of 1: 1: 1. Their findings suggest that the effectiveness of these sugars in reducing firmness and crystallinity follows the order ribose> sucrose> glucose. They also reported that for the level of added ribose no retrogradation or crystallinity was detected. The exact mechanism by which sugars suppress the crystallization of starch is not yet fully understood. It has been suggested, however, that sugars locally increase the glass transition temperature (Tg) and thereby dramatically reduce diffusion of polymer molecules to a crystal nucleus (I 'Anson et al., 1990). Levine and Slade (1990) have proposed that sugars exert an anti-staling influence by raising the glass transition temperature of the amorphous amylose matrix, thus suppressing the recrystallization of amylopectin. Increasing salt levels from 0 to about 2-3% has been reported to decrease the firming rate of bread crumb (Maga, 1975). Freezing of bread Deep freezing can be used to prevent the process of staling and inhibit microbiological activity in bread. However, the freezing of bread is not simply a matter of storing loaves in a standard freezer. Such storage will certainly stop the process of starch recrystallization, but if the maximum benefit is to be achieved it must be taken into account that after thawing, staling resumes and appears to proceed at a faster rate than in unfrozen loaves. In addition, during the freezing and thawing process the bread passes through the temperature range at which it stales fastest. A vrami 's theory of phase change kinetics (1940, 1941) can be represented by an equation which was used by Cornford et al. (1964) to study the relationship between the elastic modulus of bread crumb and its storage time and temperature. They demonstrated that the relative rate of increase in the limiting modulus became greater as storage temperatures were lowered towards the freezing point. Bread stales more rapidly in the refrigerator than at ambient temperatures, but {{page:257}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING can be stored indefinitely in the deep freeze. The fact that the staling process gets faster as the temperature is reduced can be explained by polymer theories of recrystallization which apply to partially crystalline polymers such as starch. This is due to the fact that there are actually two separate events that go to make up the process of crystallization in polymer systems such as gelatinized starch systems. The first of these two events is nucleation and the second crystal growth or propagation. These polymer theories suggest that crystal nucleation is favoured at lower temperatures but that crystal growth is favoured when the polymer chains are more mobile, to form double helixes (Figure 10.5). Nucleation is the coming together of two or more polymer chains in the right arrangement to form a nucleus for subsequent crystal growth. Because the polymer chains are always moving, not all encounters lead to proper nucleation; the chains rebound or unwind again. In general, the number of successful nucleations increases as the temperature decreases. However, for crystal growth or propagation to occur, the polymers must be sufficiently mobile for the double helixes to aggregate or pack together into the crystallites. This mobility will increase with increasing temperature, so the rate of the propagation process also increases with increasing temperature. So we can conclude that the rates at which optimum nucleation and growth occurs are different. The net result is that as the temperature of the product is reduced towards its glass transition temperature the rate of the overall crystallization process increases to a maximum, then falls. At storage temperatures below oDe (32DP), the most important single parameter which determines the storage stability potential of a food product is its glass transition temperature. It was not until the 1980s that food scientists recognized the importance of the glass transition temperature in food systems and used it to predict product properties, quality and stability. Levine and Slade (1988) introduced the idea that foods could achieve mechanical stability if the freeze-concentrated, crystal growth crystallization rate Tm Tg T Figure 10.5 CrystallizatIOn kmelIcs of partIally crystallme polymers (source Moms, 1990) {{page:258}} unfrozen water fraction is in a glassy state. Por maximum storage stability, the product must be stored at a temperature that is below its Tg (Levine and Slade, 1990). When products are stored below their Tg, they are known to have achieved the glassy state form. Once in the glassy state it is known that polymers, such as starch, are immobilized and that reactions and movement of solutes, such as sugar, and plasticizers, such as water, within their matrix are extremely slow. Bread stored below its Tg does not stale. Levine and Slade (1990) indicated that frozen storage stability is controlled by the temperature difference between the freezer temperature and the glass transition temperature. The changes in the molecular motion of polymer chains from a glassy (rigid) state to a rubbery (flexible) state also depend on the amount of water in the system (Slade and Levine, 1991). Breads with moisture contents of around 40% after baking have their starch and proteins in the rubbery state above Tg and at ambient temperatures. In bread, the Tg is at -7 to -9°C (20-16°P), below which the staling process is inhibited. Por temperatures above Tg and below the crystal melting temperature of starch, the material is 'rubbery' and sufficient motion of the polymer occurs, allowing crystallization. Under these circumstances, bread stored at, say, 21°C (700P) is considerably above the glass transition temperature of the system, and would be expected to stale. The freezing of bread can be achieved in a variety of ways. Cold air blown over the product is the commonest way. The air temperature and the air velocity will affect the rate of heat removal or freezing rates. The effect of freezing rates on bread crumb quality is related mainly to ice crystal formation. With respect to crystal formation upon freezing, slow freezing favours the formation of larger ice crystals, while fast freezing favours the formation of small ice crystals. Crystal growth is one of the factors which could affect the storage life of frozen bread, since ice crystals grow in size during storage and cause crumb weakening by damaging cell walls and disrupting internal structures to the point where the thawed product is quite unlike the original in texture and eating quality. More importantly, freezing rates control the amount of unfrozen water in the matrix. With rapid freezing, there is an increased frequency of ice crystal nucleation. This has a significant effect on the glass transition temperature of the product. Paster removal of heat enables the product to achieve a glassy state at a higher temperature, thus improving its frozen storage stability (George, 1993). It is important, therefore, to reduce the product temperature below its Tg as quickly as possible. With small-sized fermented goods, such as bread rolls, this can be achieved even in a storage freezer unit with its limited air movement, provided the unit is not overloaded. With pan bread, such as 400 and 800 g pan loaves, blast freezing is necessary in order to achieve an adequately fast freezing rate and to prevent excessive staling during the initial freezing. Dehydration of the loaves is likely to occur with prolonged frozen storage time. This arises from the low humidity of the frozen air and can be avoided by adequate wrapping of the products in low-moisture permeability film and close packing of the frozen loaves in the freezer. During thawing, however, loaves should be well spaced {{page:259}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING out to promote maximum air movement around them and maximum rate of heat transfer into the cold product. References Avranu, M (1940) Kmetlcs of phase change, II Journal of Chemical PhysIcs, 8, 212 Avrarm, M (1941) Kmetlcs of phase change, III Journal of Chemical PhysIcs, 9, 177 Bechtel, W G, Meisner, D F and Bradley, W B (1953) The effect of the crust on the staimg of bread Cereal Chemistry, 39, 160--168 Boussmggault, J G (1852) Expenments to determme the transformation of fresh bread to stale bread Annales de Chlmle Physique, 36, 490 Beuchat, L R and Golden, D A (1989) Antimicrobials occumng naturally m foods Food Technology, 43(1), 134--41 Calmes, P , Miles, M J and Moms, V J (1991) Studies of the effect of the sugars nbose, xylose and fructose on the retrogradatIOn of wheat starch gels by X-ray diffractIOn Carbohydrate Polymers, 16,355-65 Clark, H A (1946) Rope and mould Bakers' Digest, June, 49-51 Cluskey, J E , Taylor, N W and Senti, F R (1959) Relation of the ngldlty of flour, starch and gluten gels to bread staimg Cereal Chemistry, 36, 236-246 Cornford, S J , Axford, D W E and Elton, G A H (1964) The elastic modulus of bread crumb m hnear compressIOn m relatIOn to stahng Cereal Chemistry, 41, 216-229 CzuchaJowska, Z and Pomeranz, Y (1989) Differential scanmng calonmetry, water activity and mOisture contents m crumb centre and near-crust zones of bread durmg storage Cereal Chemistry, 66, 305-309 Doerry, W T (1990) Water actlVlty and safety of baked products American Instltute of Bakmg Research Department Techmcal Bulletm, 12(6) 6 pp Dragsdorf, R D and Vamano-Marston, E (1980) Bread staling X-ray diffractIOn studies on bread supplemented with alpha-amylase from different sources Cereal Chemistry, 57,310--314 Ehasson, A C (1983) Differential scanmng calonmetry studies on wheat starch-gluten mixtures II Effect of gluten and sodIUm stearoyl lactylate on starch crystalhzatlOn dunng agemg of wheat starch gels Journal of Cereal SCience, 1, 207-213 Ehasson, A C (1985) RetrogradatIon of starch as measured by differentIal scanmng calonmetry, m New Approaches to Research on Cereal Carbohydrates (eds R D Hill and L Munk), ElseVier SCience, Amsterdam, pp 93-98 Erlander, S Rand Erlander, L G (1969) ExplanatIOn of IOmc sequences m varIOus phenomena X Protem---<:arbohydrate mteractlOns and the mechamsm of for the staimg of bread Die Starke, 21, 305 George, R M (1993) Freezmg processes used m the food mdustry Trends m Food Sczence and Technology,4,134-38 Ghlasl, K, Hoseney, R C, Zeleznak, K and Rogers, DE (1984) Effect of waxy barley starch and reheatmg on firmness of bread crumb Cereal Chemistry, 61, 281-285 Guy, R C E, Hodge, D G and Robb, J (1983) An exammatlOn of the phenomena assOCiated With cake staling FMBRA Report No 107, November, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK He, Hand Hoseney, R C (1991) Differences m gas retentIOn, protem solubilIty and rheological properties between flours of different bakmg quahty Cereal Chemistry, 68, 526-530 Herz, K 0 (1965) Stalmg of bread - a review Food Technology, 19, 90-103 Hoseney, R C, Lmeback, DR and Selb, P A (1978) Role of starch m baked foods Bakers'Dlgest, 52(4), II, 14, 16, 18,40 I'Anson, K J , Miles, M J , Moms, V J et al (1990) The effects of added sugars on the retrogradatIOn of wheat starch gels Journal of Cereal SCience, 11, 243-8 Inns, R (1987) Modified atmosphere packagmg, m Modern Processmg, Packagmg and Dlstrlbutwn Systems for Foods (ed FA Pame), Van Nostrand Remhold, New York, pp 36-51 JankieWICZ, M and Mlchmewlcz, J (1987) The effect of soluble pentosans Isolated from rye gram on stahng of bread Food Chemistry, 25, 241-6 Jay, J M (1992) Modern Food Mlcrobwlogy, AVI Pubhshmg, Westport, CT, pp 3-12 Katz, J R (1928) GelatImzatIon and retrogradatIOn of starch m relatIOn to the problem of brear' {{page:260}} stalmg, m ComprehensIVe Survey of Starch Chemistry, Vol I (ed R P Walton), CheIlllcal Catalog Co, New York KIm, S K and D'Appoloma, B L (1977a) Bread stalmg studies I Effect of protem content on stalmg rate and bread crumb content on stalIng rate and bread crumb pastmg properties Cereal Chemistry, 54, 207-215 KIm, S K and D'Appoloma, B L (1977b) Bread stalmg studies II Effect of protem content and storage temperature on the role of starch Cereal Chemistry, 54, 216--224 Kim, S K and D'Appoloma, B L (1977c) Bread stalmg studies III Effect of pentosans on dough, bread and bread stalmg rate Cereal Chemistry, 54, 225-229 Kim, S K and D'Appoloma, B L (1977d) Bread stalIng studies IV Effect of pentosans on the retrogradatIOn of wheat starch gels Cereal Chemistry, 54,150-160 Knightly, W H (1977) The stalmg of bread Bakers' Digest, 51(5), 52-56,144-150 Knightly, W H (1988) Surfactants m baked foods Current practice and future trends Cereal Foods World, 33, 405-12 Krog, N, Olesen, S K, Toemaes, H and Joensson, T (1989) RetrogradatIOn of the starch fractIOn m wheat bread Cereal Foods World, 34, 281-285 Kulp, K and Ponte, J G (1981) Stalmg of white pan bread fundamental causes CRC Cntlcal ReViews of Food SCience and NutntlOn, 15, 1-48 Legan, J D (1993) Mould spOilage of bread the problem and some solutIOns InternatIOnal BlOdetenoratlOn and BIOdegradatIOn, 32, 33-53 Legan, J D (1994) SpOilage of bakery products and confectIOnery PHLS MicrobIOlogy Digest, 11(2), 114-7 Legan, J D and Voysey, P A (1991) Yeast spOilage of bakery products and mgredJents Journal of Applzed BacterIOlogy, 70,361-71 Levme, H and Slade, L (1988) Pnnclples of 'cryostablhzatlOn' technology from structure/property relatIOnships of carbohydrate/water systems - a review Cryo-Ietters, 9, 21-63 Levme, H and Slade, L (1990) Influences of the glassy and rubbery states on the thermal, mechanical, and structural properties of doughs and baked products, m Dough Rheology and Baked Product Texture (eds H Fandl and J M FaubIOn), Van Nostrand Remhold, pp 157-330 Leung, H K, Magnuson, J A and Brumsma, B L (1983) Water bmdmg of wheat flour doughs and breads as studied by deutero relaxation Journal of Food SCience, 48, 95-9 Lmeback, DR (1984) The role of starch m bread stalIng, m InternatIOnal Symposium on Advances m Bakmg SCience and Technology, Department of Gram SCience, Kansas State Umverslty, Manhattan, Kansas Maga, J A (1975) Bread stalIng CRC Cntlcal ReViews of Food Technology, 29, 443-486 Martm, M Land Hoseney, R C (1991) A mechamsm of bread flrIlllng II Role of starch hydrolyzmg enzymes Cereal Chemistry, 68, 503-507 Martm, M L, Zeleznak, K J and Hoseney, R C (1991) A mechamsm of bread flrmmg I Role of starch fmmng Cereal Chemistry, 68, 498-503 Miller, B S , Johnson, J A and Palmer, D L (1953) A companson of cereal, fungal and bactenal alpha-amylase as supplements for bread makmg Food Technology, 7, 38-42 Moms, V J (1990) Starch gelatIOn and retrogradatIOn Trends m Food SCience and Technology, July, 2-6 OoraIkul, B (1982) Gas packagmg for a bakery product Canadzan Institute of Food SCience and Technology, 15(4),313-5 Osborne, B G (1980) The occurrence of ochratoxm A m mouldy bread and flour Food and Cosmetics TOXicology, 18, 615-7 Ponte, J G and Tsen, C C (1978) Bakery products, m Food and Beverage Mycology (ed L R Beuchat), AVI PublIshmg Co, Westport, CT, pp 191-223 Potter, N (1986) Food SCience, 4th edn, AVI PublIshmg Co, Westport, CT, p 463 Rao, P A, Nussmovltch, A and ChmachottI, P (1992) Effects of selected surfactants on amylopectin recrystallIzation and on recoverabIllty of bread crumb Cereal Chemistry, 69, 613-618 Rmg, S G , Colonna, P , I' Anson, K J et al (1987) The gelation and crystallIzatIOn of amylopectm Carbohydrate Research, 162,277-93 Rogers, DE, Zeleznak, K J , LaI, C Sand Hoseney, R C (1988) Effect of native lipids, shortemng and bread mOisture on bread flrmmg Cereal Chemistry, 65, 398-401 Russell, P L (1982) Recent work on bread stalIng FMBRA Bulletm No 2, Apnl, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK, pp 69-80 {{page:261}} BREAD SPOILAGE AND STALING Russell, P L (1983a) A kInetic study of bread stahng by dIfferential scannIng calonmetry Starch/Starke, 35, 277-81 Russell, P L (1983b) A kInetic study of bread stahng by dIfferential scannIng calonmetry and compressIbIlIty measurements The effects of added monog1ycendes Journal of Cereal SCience, 1, 297-303 Russell, P L (1987) AgIng of gels from starches of dIfferent amylose/amylopectIn content - a DSC study Journal of Cereal SCience, 6,147-58 Schoch, T J (1945) The fractIOnatIOn of starch, In Advances In Carbohydrate Chemistry, Vol 1 (eds W W PIgman and M L Wolfrom), Acadellllc Press, New York Schoch, T J and French, D (1947) StudIes on bread stalIng 1 Role of starch Cereal Chemistry, 24, 231-249 SeIler, D A L (1968) ProlongIng the shelf-lIfe of cakes The Bnflsh Baker, 7 June, 25-6, 60-2 SeIler, D A L (1983) PreservatIon of bakery products FMBRA Bulletin No 4, August, CCFRA, ChIppIng Campden, UK, pp 166-77 SeIler, D A L (1984) Controlled atmosphere packagIng for preserVIng bakery products FMBRA Bulletin No 2, AprIl, CCFRA, ChIppIng Campden, UK, pp 48-60 SeIler, D A L (1989) ModIfIed atmosphere packagIng of bakery products, In Controlled/Modified AtmospherelVacuum Packaging of Foods (ed A L Brody), Food and NutntlOn Press, Trumbell, CT, pp 119-33 SeIler, D (1992) BaSIC gUIde to product spOIlage and hygIene Part I Mould growth on bread Chorleywood Digest No 12i, CCFRA, ChIppIng Carnpden, UK, pp 117-9 SeIler, D (1993) BaSIC gUIde to product spOIlage and hygIene Part 2 Yeast spOIlage of bread Chorleywood Digest No 124, CCFRA, ChIppIng Carnpden, UK, p 23 SIlhker, J H (1980) Cereals and cereal products, In Mlcrobzal Ecology of Foods (ed J H SIlhker), AcademIc Press, Orlando, FL, pp 669-730 (1987) Recent advances In starch retrogradatIOn, In industrial Slade, L and LeVIne, H Polysacchandes The Impact of BIOtechnology and Advanced MethodologIes (eds S S StIvala, V CrescenzI and I C M Dea), Gordon and Breach, New York, p 387 Slade, L and LeVIne, H (1991) Beyond water actIvIty Recent advances based on an alternatIve approach to the assessment of food quahty and safety Cnflcal ReVIews of Food SCience and NutrltlOn, 30, 115-360 Tamstorf, S , Joenssen, T and Krog, N (1986) The role of fats and emulSIfIers In baked products, In Chemistry and PhYSICS of Baking (eds J Blanshard, P FraZIer and T Galhand), Royal SOCIety of ChemIstry, London, pp 75-88 Wagner, M K and Moberg, L J (1989) Present and future use of tradItIOnal antImIcrobIals Food Technology, 43(4), 143-7, 155 Wlllhoft, E M A (1973a) MechanIsm and theory of stalIng of bread and baked goods and assOCIated changes In textural propertIes Journal of Textural Studies, 4, 292-322 WIllhoft, EM A (I 973b) Recent developments on the bread stalIng problem Bakers' Digest, 47(6), 14-21 Wynne-Jones, Sand Blanshard, J M V (1986) HydratIOn studIes of wheat starch, amylopectIn, amylose gels and bread by proton magnetic resonance Carbohydrate Polymers, 6, 289-306 {{page:279}}
