---
book: "Technology of Breadmaking"
book_slug: "cauvain-technology-of-breadmaking"
author: "Stanley P. Cauvain & Linda S. Young"
lang: "en"
relevance: "core"
chapter: "Chapter 11: Principles of dough formation"
heading: "Chapter 11: Principles of dough formation"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 11: Principles of dough formation"]
order: 11
source_page: 279
tokens_est: 19658
---

# Chapter 11: Principles of dough formation

{{page:279}} CLYDE E. STAUFFER Introduction The first, basic step in breadmaking is combining water with wheat flour and kneading (imparting mechanical energy to) the mixture to form an elastic dough (Bushuk, 1985; Hoseney, 1985). Flour from wheat, rather than from other cereal grains, is used because wheat storage protein has unique properties; no other cereal storage protein possesses the ability to form a viscoelastic dough when wetted and kneaded. A full explanation at the molecular level for this uniqueness still eludes researchers. The events that occur when gluten proteins are hydrated and worked are also elusive. Part of the obscurity is due to the complexity of the system. The basic properties of dough are established by the characteristics of the storage (gluten) proteins in the flour. These characteristics, however, are modified by other flour components, both soluble and insoluble, as well as the additional ingredients added to dough. In studying dough formation we are limited to observing physical events on a macro scale, at the supramolecular level. Numerous techniques that study molecular properties have been applied to dough; X-ray analysis, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), electron spin resonance spectrophotometry (ESR) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), to name just a few. The interpretation of the results, however, is always complicated by the complexity of the system. X-ray analysis, for example, led to a model of the dough matrix (Grosskreutz, 1961) that included gluten proteins, phospholipids and solid (starch) contributions, but there is no way to confirm independently the accuracy of that model. While these techniques each help us clarify certain aspects of dough structure, the concepts that will be set forth in the chapter are of necessity highly speculative. This fact must be kept firmly in mind while reading this or any other publication on dough formation. The macroproperties of dough change with time. At the end of the mixing process (Chapter 4) the dough has certain viscoelastic characteristics that are considered optimum for subsequent processing. The resting period (floortime) changes these properties and makes the dough more pliable (relaxed). Dividing and rounding reverses this to some extent, and the dough appears more elastic (less relaxed). An intermediate proof period decreases the elasticity, allowing good molding into the shape of a loaf. During proofing the characteristics are further modified, not only by relaxation but also by changes in © Thomson Science 1998 {{page:263}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION matrix composition from the products of fermentation (ethanol, carbon dioxide), by the action of additives (oxidants and enzymes) and possibly by the action of native flour proteases. Again, our understanding of the molecular alterations resulting in these modifications in dough properties is rudimentary, at best. Governing all our discussions about dough formation (and the breadmaking process) is the fact that the ultimate criterion of 'good' or 'poor' structures and processes is the final product - a good loaf of bread. The two main contributors to bread quality are volume (stability in the prover or proofbox and good oven spring) and a fine, silky crumb. These desirable outcomes depend, obviously, on certain optimum properties in the dough matrix. Two characteristics define a 'good'dough: • the ability to retain gas (carbon dioxide), generated during fermentation (proofing), in the form of numerous small gas cells; • a proper balance of viscous flow and elastic strength so that the loaf can expand adequately during proofing and the early stages of baking, yet retain its rounded form. Gluten (hydrated wheat storage protein) is the component of dough that determines how well these requirements are met. While other flour components affect gluten functionality, and mechanical energy input during mixing is crucial to developing the proper characteristics, it is still the physicochemical nature of gluten proteins with which we will be mainly concerned in this discussion of dough formation. Flour and dough components Wheat flour components (dry basis) can be classified into six groups: 1. starch; 2. storage (gluten) proteins; 3. non-starch polysaccharides (pentosans); 4. lipids; 5. water-soluble proteins; 6. inorganic compounds (ash). Starch is relatively inert during dough mixing, but plays a role as a 'filler' that contributes to increased dough viscoelasticity. (Starch, of course, has a critical influence during the baking process, when it gelatinizes, and during subsequent storage, when retrogradation accounts for the major part of bread staling; see Chapter 10.) Endogenous inorganic materials are relatively unimportant in dough formation, although added salt strongly influences dough properties. The other four component groups listed are actively involved in dough formation during mixing and subsequent processing. {{page:264}} Starch Starch represents by far the largest portion of flour, making up about 65% of ordinary flour (14% moisture basis). Wheat starch comprises about 23% amylose and 73% amylopectin (thus the two species represent 15% and 50% of the flour weight, respectively). Amylose is a linear chain of a-l,4linked glucose units, with a molecular weight in the range of 100 000 Da, while amylopectin is a highly branched structure, with an estimated molecular weight in the range of 20000000 Da (Figure 11.1). Native starch exists as granules and has a high degree of crystallinity, evidenced by birefringence (the 'Maltese cross' seen when it is examined with a polarizing microscope). These granules are relatively inert during mixing but influence dough elasticity by their presence in the total matrix. In a hard wheat flour as much as 15% of the starch granules (10% of the flour weight) are 'damaged', that is, they have been deformed during milling and contain cracks and fissures. Damaged starch granules absorb about four times as much water as intact granules, and increase dough water absorption (see below and Chapter 12). Also, damaged starch is much more susceptible to the action of a-amylase than is intact starch, a fact that enters into dough property modification during the proofing stage of processing. - - - - I- ~ - I-- ... ~ 8 A Figure 11.1 (A) Amylopectin, (B) a starch granule. {{page:265}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION Gluten The storage protein found in flour is not, strictly speaking, gluten; that term designates the hydrated glutelins (glutenins) and prolamines (gliadins) formed when a dough is mixed. However, for convenience in this discussion the anhydrous storage protein of wheat endosperm will be called gluten (as the term is commonly used). Of the total protein in wheat flour, about one-sixth is soluble protein (albumins and globulins), falling into group 5 in the list above. Thus a flour having 12% protein contains only about 10% gluten. The molecular characteristics of gluten proteins will be examined in more detail below. Pentosans Non-starch polysaccharides represent only about 2-2.5% of flour (Michniewicz et aI., 1990), but have a disproportionate influence on dough properties. They are sometimes called hemicelluloses because they constitute part of the cell wall materials (formed in conjunction with cellulose) in the seed, made by the plant as the wheat berry is synthesized and ripening. More often the name pentosans is used because approximately 80% of the sugars present are the pentoses D-xylose and D-arabinose. The pentosans are a heterogeneous group of macromolecules, but the preponderant backbone structure is a xylan, a chain of P-l,4 linked Dxylose units. Various other sugars are attached to this chain by a-l,3 linkages; the major side chain sugar is arabinose, but small amounts of glucose, fructose and mannose are also found. Besides the xylans, a significant amount of arabinogalactan (polygalactose chain with arabinose side chains) is present in the water-soluble portion. About 65% of wheat flour pentosans are water-insoluble (WI) pentosans (Michniewicz et al., 1990); these are almost exclusively xylans. The water-soluble (WS) pentosans are approximately half arabinoxylans and half arabinogalactans. Pentosans are gums; they absorb several times their weight in water and form highly viscous solutions. This is especially important in rye flour (Chapter 13), where the pentosan content may be as high as 10%; the viscosity that allows rye flour to form a dough is due almost exclusively to pentosans. The water-absorbing property of pentosans is influential in wheat flour doughs (see below) and the viscosity due to the WS pentosans influences the viscoelastic behavior of dough. Flour pentosans form gels when treated with certain oxidants (Geissman and Neukom, 1973). The mechanism involves ferulic acid, an a,p-unsaturated aromatic carboxylic acid that is esterified to arabinoxylans (Figure 11.2). Oxidants that generate free radicals, for example hydrogen peroxide, promote crosslinking between ferulic acid residues on adjacent polymer chains and lead to gelation of suspensions of both WI and WS pentosans. The formation of covalent linkages with gluten proteins has been postulated (Neukom and Markwalder, 1978), via reaction between ferulic acid and tyrosine side chains of the protein (Figure 11.3). Sulfhydryl compounds react with a,p unsaturated {{page:266}} F\r.0 o ~H3 HO ~ _H=CH-&-O-Pentosan pentosan~-CH=CH< }OH H3CO peroxidase! H 202 ° OCHa pentosan~-CH=CH%' OH _ 0 HO \ /, H=CH-&-O-Pentosan H3CO Figure 11.2 Oxidative crosslinking of ferulic acid in flour pentosans. aromatic acids. 14C-tagged cysteine binds to WS pentosans (Sidhu et at., 1980b), presumably through addition of the -SH group across the activated double bond. Cysteine inhibits the oxidative gelation of pentosans (Hoseney and Faubion, 1981). Carboxylic acids with an activated double bond (e.g. fumaric acid and cinnamic acids) drastically reduce the mixing stability of doughs (Hoseney and Faubion, 1981). These facts have been interpreted to mean that during normal dough mixing feruloyl moieties attached to pentosans are attached to gluten proteins via addition of sulfhydryl groups across the activated double bond, generating crosslinks and enhancing dough elasticity (Figure 11.3). Lipids Wheat flour contains about 2.5% lipids. Of this, about 1.0% are non-polar lipids (triglycerides, diglycerides, free fatty acids and sterol esters). The two main groups of polar lipids are galactosyl glycerides (0.6%) and phospholipids (0.9%). During mixing, both classes of lipids are complexed with gluten and become relatively unextractable with any of the usual solvents (Daniels et at., 1976; Wootton, 1976; DeStefanis et at., 1977). Grosskreutz (1961) interpreted his X-ray spacings to indicate the presence of bimolecular layers of polar lipids in the gluten complex, and polar lipids have been proposed as adhesive agents between starch granules and gluten protein in several other models (Chung, 1986). Flour lipids appear to have little affect on mixing requirements; the mixogram is identical for control and defatted flours (Schroeder and Hoseney, 1978). On the other hand, the addition of anionic surfactants such as sodium dodecyl sulfate strengthens the dough and increases mixing time (Danno and Hoseney, {{page:267}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION + SH I Protein Protein Tyr Cys ( 1 ",'{ > HO ~ !. CH2-r~-O-pentosan-o-~-CH"CH '1_' OH OCH, 0 0 S I Protein Cys I Protein Figure 11.3 Reactions of water-soluble pentosans with dough proteins. Left, addition of -SH to ferulic acid. Right, ferulic acid linking to tyrosine. 1982). While these are not flour components, the effect offers further insight into the nature of the gluten complex (and how mechanical mixing modifies it) and will be discussed in more detail below. Lipids have a major influence on baking performance of bread, especially with respect to oven spring (loaf volume) and the keeping quality of the finished product. However, this aspect of lipids in baking is outside the scope of this chapter. Water-soluble proteins The water-soluble fraction of flour (approximately 2-3% of total flour weight) contains albumins and globulins as well as WS pentosans. The proteins include enzymes, enzyme inhibitors, lipoproteins, lectins, and globulins of unknown function. It is reported that two-dimensional electrophoresis shows over 300 components. These undoubtedly have some biological function in the seed, relating to its primary role as the progenitor of the next wheat plant. The only clearly identified role played by any of these compounds in baking is the action of ~-amylase on starch, generating maltose which serves as a fermentable sugar for yeast during proofing of lean doughs. Reconstitution studies with fractionated flour components show that the water-soluble fraction plays a role in the breakdown of overmixed doughs {{page:268}} (Schroeder and Hoseney, 1978). A mixogram of only the gluten and starch fractions showed a long mixing time with extremely long mixing tolerance; when the water-soluble fraction was also included the mixogram resembled that of the control (unfractionated) flour. The fraction was dialyzed (removing low molecular weight materials) and then heated (denaturing proteins). The remaining soluble material (presumably mainly WS pentosans), when added back to the gluten plus starch fractions, gave a mixogram similar to that of the control, i.e. mixing to a peak followed by relatively rapid breakdown. Ash Wheat flour contains about 0.5% ash (higher if a longer extraction rate is used by the miller; see Chapter 12). This inorganic material has little influence on dough formation. The addition of salt, however, increases the resistance of dough to mechanical mixing and decreases water absorption, presumably due to enhanced gluten aggregation. The mechanism of this effect of salt (sodium chloride) as well as other inorganic salts will be discussed in more detail below. Flour components and water absorption An important factor in commercial bread dough production is the proper water to flour ratio. In common usage this ratio is called 'absorption', and expressed as a percentage. The adjective 'proper' differs depending upon the kind of dough being made (absorption is much lower for a bagel dough than for a white pan bread dough) and the method used in its measurement (Farinograph absorption is generally 2-4% lower than operational absorption). Operational (or baking) absorption, of course, means the water to flour ratio that results in a dough having the handling (machinability), proofing and baking (loaf volume), and finished product (appearance, eating quality) characteristics necessary to give the desired baked food (bread). As stated above and discussed in Chapter 1, the criterion of 'good' or 'poor' is determined by the final product and the consumer. The contribution of various flour components to absorption has usually been made using some sort of instrumental measurement, with the instrument defining 'correct' absorption. This is most often the Brabender Farinograph (Chapter 12), which records mechanical resistance as a simple mixture of flour and water is kneaded. Farinograph absorption is the water to flour ratio that results in a recorder trace which, at its maximum, is centered on the 500 (or 600 in the UK) Brabender units line. This is generally lower than baking absorption - the water to flour ratio, determined by an experienced mixer operator, that gives optimum dough handling and final product qualities. The absorption numbers that are presented here must be understood as representing the relative water uptake by the various components, and not an attempt to allow precise calculation of baking absorption for a given flour based upon analytical data. {{page:269}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION Four flour components absorb water; protein, native starch, damaged starch and pentosans. The relative absorptions (in grams of water per gram of component) are given in Table 11.1. Using analytical data (typical for a hard red spring wheat flour) shown in column 3, an absorption of 68.4% is calculated (total of column 4), which is reasonable for such a flour. Both soluble and insoluble (gluten) proteins absorb water (Greer and Stewart, 1959; Bushuk, 1966). We might expect that absorption by the insoluble gluten proteins would have more effect on dough rheology than solution of the soluble proteins, but the specific evidence for such a conclusion is somewhat indirect. The greater influence of gluten proteins on baking absorption is highlighted in a study by Tipples et al. (1978). They measured total protein, wet gluten, gluten 'quality' (wet gluten quantity divided by total protein), damaged starch and pentosan contents of flours from a number of milling streams of Canadian hard red spring wheat. They also measured Farinograph absorption and baking absorption (for several different baking protocols) of the flours. The most important predictor of Farinograph absorption was damaged starch content; inclusion of total protein improved the prediction equation significantly, but including the other factors produced no further improvement (i.e. no increase in ,-2). Of the five baking tests they used, the one most like commercial (North American) production methods was the remix test that included 0.3% malt. This test is similar to the standard AACC (American Association of Cereal Chemists) baking test, with a long (nearly 3 h) bulk fermentation, but the dough is then remixed before being molded and panned. The most important single factor in predicting baking absorption was gluten quality. Adding simple protein level as a prediction factor significantly increased reliability (,-2), but the other factors (damaged starch and pentosan content) were not statistically SIgnificant. Native starch granules are relatively impermeable to water. This may be due in part to the lipids and protein found on the surface of the granules, probably derived from the cell wall of the amyloplasts present in the ripening wheat berry (Greenwood, 1976). While native starch is the largest single contributor to absorption, this is due to its preponderance in flour. During baking, of course, when these granules swell and gelatinize, the contents become readily hydratable and are probably the main water-binding species in baked bread. Table 11.1 Influence of flour components on absorptIOn Component water amount per AbsorptIOn 100 g flour (g) per g component (g) per 100 g flour Protem 13 12 156 04 Intact starch 57 228 20 160 Damaged starch 8 Pentosans 7 {{page:270}} Most damaged starch is formed during milling (though amylase action in sprouted grain can also cause starch damage). During the process of reducing chunks of endosperm from the break rolls to flour on the reduction rolls, the particles are subjected to extreme pressure. The granules are somewhat elastic and return to their original shape after the pressure is relieved, but some granules are left with cracks and fissures. These represent spots where water can readily penetrate to the interior of the granule and interact with the amorphous regions found there. More pressure at the reduction rolls is needed to break up hard wheat endosperm than for soft wheat; hence hard wheat flours typically have a higher damaged starch content (6-12%) than soft wheat flours (2-4%). These cracks also represent points of susceptibility to amylase action, in contrast to intact starch granules which are resistant to amylolytic attack under ordinary conditions. Digestion by amylases in dough releases maltose, which can be fermented by yeast, as discussed in Chapter 3. Also, during proofing digestion of damaged starch decreases its water-holding capability, releasing more water into the dough matrix and increasing pan flow. Significant amylolytic activity requires some period of time, and is not a factor during the relatively short time involved in dough formation. Studies on the water-absorbing capabilities of pentosans give rather varied results. Kim and D' Appolonia (1977) added isolated pentosans to flour and measured the change in Farinograph absorption. The addition of 1 % WS pentosan increased absorption by 4.4%, while 1 % WI pentosan increased absorption by 9.9%. Michniewicz et al. (1990) added WI pentosan to various hard wheat flours at different levels, and measured the changes in Farinograph absorption. They found increases in absorption ranging from 3.2 to 5.6 g of water per gram of pentosan; the increment was smaller when the intrinsic baking quality of the test flour was better. Patil et al. (1976) used flour fractionation and reconstitution studies to explore the effect of flour water solubles and WS pentosan fractions on absorption, mixing time and loaf volume. They found essentially no effect of WS pentosan on baking absorption (and a small, variable effect on mixing times). In recent studies examining the effect of added xylanases on dough consistency, it was reported that allowing time for the enzymes to degrade pentosans has approximately the same effect as increasing absorption by 10% (H. Moonen and H. Levine, unpublished). Based on all these reports, a median value of 7 g of water absorbed per gram of flour pentosans was chosen for inclusion in Table 11.1. Wheat gluten proteins Wheat proteins have occupied a central position in protein studies since early times. Gluten was first recognized as the rubbery component of wheat flour in 1729 (Bailey, 1941), although at that early stage it was not called protein (the term had not yet been coined). The common method of characterizing proteins {{page:271}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION according to their solubility was developed using wheat proteins (Osborne, 1907). According to Osborne's scheme, proteins were divided into four groups: • albumins, soluble in distilled water; • globulins, soluble in dilute salt solutions; • prolamines, soluble in 70% aqueous ethanol; • glutelins, soluble in dilute acid. Gluten proteins are members of the latter two groups. Amino acid composition Wheat gluten proteins are anomalous, even compared to other cereal storage proteins, in their amino acid make-up (Kasarda, 1989). About one-third of the residues are glutamyl residues, which are almost entirely in the form of glutamine (the amide of the side chain carboxyl group). The amide, a non-ionizing group, readily forms hydrogen bonds with electron donors (other amides and water molecules). The content of basic amino acid residues (arginine, lysine and histidine) is relatively low, and the amount of carboxylic acid residues (aspartic and glutamic acid) is even lower. As a result the proteins have a rather low surface charge density, even at pH values somewhat removed from the isoelectric point. Since the charge repulsion between molecules is low the protein chains can approach each other and interact (form hydrogen bonds) in the aqueous dough matrix. The addition of sodium chloride further suppresses charge repulsion, increasing molecular interaction. Gluten also contains a higher level (about 14% of the residues) of proline than is usual in proteins. This amino acid favors formation of ~-sheets and similar structures that are thought to be responsible for some of the elastic characteristics of gluten (see discussion below). While the content of hydrophobic amino acids is not unusual, the lack of ionic character makes hydrophobic interactions between protein chains possible. The hydrophobicity of gluten proteins has been demonstrated experimentally by chromatography of acid-solubilized gluten on hydrophobic gel media such as phenyl-sepharose (Chung and Pomeranz, 1979). These authors examined gluten from two flours having different baking properties, and found that glutenin from the good-baking flour was more strongly absorbed to the gel than the glutenin from the poor-baking flour. Surprisingly, the relationship was reversed for gliadin; that from the poor-baking flour was bound somewhat more strongly than gliadin from the good-baking flour. Kaczkowski et al. (1990), on the other hand, found gliadin from a goodbaking wheat to be slightly more hydrophobic than gliadin from wheat of medium-baking quality. They used binding capacity for sodium dodecyl sulfate as their criterion of hydrophobicity, a difference in technique that might account for the discordant results. {{page:272}} Gliadin Actually a heterogeneous group of prolamines, more than 70 different gliadin species have been identified, using chromatography and electrophoresis. They are rather hydrophobic, hence their insolubility in water or salt solutions, but can be divided into groups based upon their degree of hydrophobicity. More hydrophobic gliadins (the y-gliadins) increase bread loaf volume, while gliadins from the more hydrophilic end of the spectrum (co-gliadins) decrease loaf volume (Weegels et al., 1990; van Lonkhuijsen et al., 1992). Gliadin proteins are relatively small, with molecular weights in the range 30 000100000 Da. They are single-chain proteins (i.e. no crosslinks between chains) and such disulfide bonds as occur are all intramolecular (Figure II.4A). Concentrated solutions of isolated gliadin are highly viscous, with little measurable elasticity. Glutenin Glutenin is the type example of Osborne's glutelins. Like gliadin it is quite hydrophobic (its amino acid composition is similar to that of gliadin) but it has a very different molecular structure; glutenin is a polymeric protein. The average molecular weight of native glutenin is stated to be about 3 x 106 Da, a number that is highly approximate and serves only to characterize the wide molecular weight distribution of glutenin (Kasarda, 1989). Polymerization takes place via intermolecular disulfide bonds. Reduction of these bonds with a reagent such as dithiothreitol (DTT) frees the basic glutenin subunits, which can be separated B A s-s~s-s \\~~ . s-s ..... _""1 _____ ,,)\)'l ~ I ! , _ _ , 1 -5 5 1 I c J S-S ~\~OJJ1. S-S II~VYII 5-S 1 -s -s S I Figure 11.4 Schematic depictIOn of gluten protems (A) Ghadm. (B) HMW glutenm subumt, showmg possible action of the ~ SPlfalS as 'molecular spnng', (C) HMW glutemn subumt, showmg disulfide bond preventmg extenSIOn of the ~ spirals, (D) LMW glutemn subumt {{page:273}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION using SDS-PAGE (electrophoresis in a polyacrylamide gel in the presence of a high concentration of sodium dodecyl sulfate, a technique that separates proteins on the basis of their molecular weights). Two groups of subunits are identified. High molecular weight glutenin subunits (HMW-GS) have apparent molecular weights in the range 80000-120000 Da, while the molecular weights of low molecular weight glutenin subunits (LMW -GS) are about 40 000-55 000 Da. The molar ratio of LMW -GS to HMW -GS is 2: 1 or higher; the amounts of the two kinds of subunits are roughly equal on a weight basis. The molecular architecture of glutenin subunits is unusual (Figure 11.4). In HMW subunits cysteine is concentrated in the regions near each end of the chain, with a long stretch of other amino acids between these two ends. The cysteine residues are involved in both intra- and intermolecular disulfide bond formation. LMW subunits have a similar concentration of cysteine residue, but at only one end of the chain (Figure 11.4D). Thus, both ends of the HMW protein can enter into polymerization reactions, while only one end of the LMW protein can react this way. The interior regions of both species, but the HMW subunits in particular, are postulated to form ~-tum spirals, which in tum can fold into a helical sheet structure that can possibly be likened to a coil spring (Figure ll.4B). This is only a hypothesis, but it is an attractive one that could account for the elastic nature of glutenin. An intramolecular disulfide bond can restrain this 'spring' (Figure 11.4C); this bond can be broken during mixing (see below) to 'develop' the gluten structure. Isolated glutenin, when rehydrated, forms an elastic, rubbery mass that has almost no viscous flow characteristics. Numerous proposals have been put forward for the structure of glutenin polymers in dough (Figure 11.5). Unfortunately, because glutenin is such an intractable protein to examine, these must of necessity be considered highly speCUlative. Graveland et al. (1985) postulated a basic 'building block' of three glutenin subunits linked through disulfide bonds (glutenin IlIa) and a tetramer of this basic structure (glutenin IIIb). These react with linear proteins having two or more reactive sulfhydryl sites, to form a larger molecule called glutenin II. Glutenin I is a highly polymerized, insoluble protein which is thought to be the glutenin protein present in wheat flour. It is partially depolymerized during mixing and reforms during the resting stage of dough processing. Gao et al. (1992) examined the effects of small amounts of DTT on dough consistency in the Farinograph, and arrived at a slightly different model. They also postulate a subunit structure similar to Graveland's, but specify both HMW and LMW subunits in their 'building block'. In their work DTT reduction of a small portion of disulfide bonds produced the maximum decrease in consistency; they called these 'rheologically effective -S-S-'. Jones et al. (1974) used a similar approach (a change in Farinograph consistency in the presence of small amounts of DTT) to conclude that only about 3% of the disulfide groups in flour affect the rate of dough development, and about 12% of the disulfide groups are involved in mixing resistance. The best current picture of glutenin is that it is a large linear polymer, and interactions between glutenin chains in dough is {{page:274}} Glutenin II \ Glutenin I (insol.) Glutenin ilia A ~-~-~ ! on, mixing ~~:Oi Rheologically active -8-8HMW glutenin subunits LMW glutenin subunits B Figure 11.5 Two models of glutenin structure in dough. (A) Adapted from Graveland et al. (1985), (B) adapted from Gao et al. (1992). through non-covalent forces, namely hydrogen and hydrophobic bonds (Ewart, 1977). Stages in dough formation The word 'dough' connotes a semi-solid mass that resists mixing. In a recording mixer such as the Mixograph, a dough in the mixing bowl gives enhanced (and variable) resistance as the mixing head rotates, while a batter (a semi-liquid mass) causes low resistance with little variability (narrow band width). The progression from a simple mixture of water and flour to a dough correlates with {{page:275}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION an increased resistance to mixing, however that may be recorded. A Mixograph is just as much a mixer as any large commercial dough mixing machine, and the trace can be easily translated into consistency changes during dough mixing. In Figure 11.6 a typical Mixograph trace shows the various stages of dough formation: hydration, blending, gluten development and breakdown. These same stages can be observed in a commercial horizontal mixer (pyler, 1988). Bakers refer to them as the 'pickup stage' (pyler, 1988, Fig. 14.3), 'cleanup stage' (Fig. 14.4), 'development' (Figs 14.5-14.7) and 'letdown' and 'breakdown' (Figs 14.8 and 14.9), respectively. Hydration In flour most of the protein exists as a flinty material. An analogy for the hydration of this protein is hydration of a bar of soap. If the soap is simply immersed in a bowl of water, the water slowly penetrates the outer layer of the bar. Rubbing the soap wipes off this soft, hydrated layer, and water proceeds to penetrate further into the soap. In the same way, the initial action of the mixer hastens the conversion of the flinty protein bodies into a soft, hydrated (but not truly dissolved) protein dispersion that is further modified during gluten development. Simultaneously the WI pentosans and damaged starch granules are absorbing water, and the water-soluble flour components (and added water-soluble ingredients such as salt and sugar) are dissolving. The soap analogy is not strictly accurate. When water is brought into contact with flour particles and the process is observed under a microscope, the particles Time, minutes Figure 11.6 A Mixograph trace, indicating the four main stages of dough formation. {{page:276}} seem to explode; strands of protein are rapidly expelled into the aqueous phase (Bernardin and Kasarda, 1973). Movement of the cover glass stretches the protein strands, indicating their extensibility (Amend and Belitz, 1990). The rapid extrusion of protein fibers appears in part to be due to surface tension at the air-water-protein interface. Amend and Belitz (1990) submerged flour particles in acetone, which was then replaced by water. The particles swelled but no fiber formation was evident. The input of mechanical energy is crucial to dough formation. A simple exercise demonstrates this fact. Blend cold wheat flour with powdered ice (in a 100:65 ratio) and then allow it to warm to room temperature. The result is a thick slurry that has no dough-like properties. When this slurry is stirred it rapidly increases in consistency, forming a soft (undeveloped) dough. Hydration alone is not sufficient to make a dough. Blending Flour particles are agglomerates of starch granules embedded in a network of protein (Figure 11.7). As the protein network is softened by hydration and agitated by mixing, the starch granules become less firmly attached to the protein, but nevertheless remain associated with the protein fibers (Figure 11.8). Most of the starch can be removed by washing and kneading the dough (the basis for isolating wet gluten) but it cannot be totally removed. SEM photos of optimally mixed dough indicate that most of the starch is readily removable, but Figure 11.7 Hydrated flour partIcle after starch IS removed by enzymatic digestIOn, showmg the protem framework (from Amend, 1995, by permissIOn) {{page:277}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION Figure 11.8 Protem film and associated starch granules m a hydrated, stretched flour particle (from Amend, 1995, by penrusslOn) a small number of granules appear to have protein fibrils strongly attached to them (Amend and Belitz, 1990, Fig. 20). The actual strength of the starch-protein interactions has not, of course, been measured, but only inferred from observations such as those described. During this early stage of mixing all the ingredients of dough are being blended, to give a dough mass that is, at least at the millimeter scale, homogeneous. Lipids (flour and added lipids) are uniformly distributed and brought into contact with the protein fibers, and soluble materials are fully dissolved and distributed in the aqueous matrix. Gluten development The pivotal step in forming a wheat flour dough is the increase in consistency (increased resistance to mixing) that is generally called 'dough development'. During this stage of mixing, the flour-water mixture is converted from a thick, viscous slurry to a smooth viscoelastic mass, characterized by a dry, silky appearance (and feel) and the ability to be extended into a thin continuous membrane. The most important practical parameter is mixing time (or total energy input, which amounts to the same thing), the time required to reach the peak consistency (maximum resistance) of the dough. Dough mixed to this point gives the maximum loaf volume, as compared with dough that is undermixed or significantly overmixed. (It should be noted that in commercial practice mixing is usually extended slightly beyond the peak, giving a dough with better machinability in the subsequent molding step, and one less likely to exhibit a 'wild shred' during baking.) {{page:278}} a b c Figure 11.9 Gluten network m dough at VarIOUS stages of ffilxmg (a) Early m the process (at about the ffilddle of the hydratIOn stage), (b) partJally ffilxed dough, (c) dough at maximum development stage (from Amend, 1995, by perffilSSlOn) {{page:279}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION The previous paragraph describes gluten (dough) development on the macroscopic scale. Scanning electron microphotographs of gluten at various stages of development have been published. One such series is shown in Figure 11.9 (Amend, 1995). At early stages (corresponding to the 'hydration' segment of Figure 11.6) the fibrils of hydrated protein adhere to each other, forming a rather coarse, random network of large strands (Figure 11.9a). The action of the mixer stretches these strands, thinning them but also orienting them along the direction of the stretching action, allowing them to interact with each other (Figure 11.9b). At the peak of consistency (Figure 11.9c) the protein fibrils have been significantly reduced in diameter, and they appear to interact two-dimensionally, rather than just along the individual strand axes. In other words, at this stage the gluten appears able to form the continuous film, or gluten sheet, that is used by a baker (by hand-stretching a piece of dough) to evaluate completeness of mixing. The crucial question, and one that continues to generate much research, is 'What happens on the molecular level during dough mixing?'. The research is complicated by the complexity of the dough system, and the fact that the main species involved (glutenin) is a high molecular weight polymeric protein that is, to a large extent, insoluble. Nevertheless, progress towards the answer is being made. It seems clear that mixing breaks the high molecular weight glutenin into smaller units, which then reform to some extent. Graveland et al. (1985 and references therein), for example, found that during short high-energy mixing the amount of glutenin having a lower molecular weight (less than I MDa) increased sharply, but then decreased again when the dough was allowed to rest. This is the basis for the model shown in Figure l1.4A; the insoluble glutenin I (assumed to be the form in the dry endosperm) is depolymerized, perhaps down as far as the glutenin III subunits, but also repolymerizes to glutenin II during a subsequent resting stage. Ewart (1977) came to a similar conclusion in his consideration of mixing action, that glutenin macromolecules are broken during mixing. The points of scission are thought to be at the disulfide bonds, forming thiyl radicals (-S-S- --7 2 -S*). The presence of free radicals in flour was shown by Redman et al. (1966; see also Dronzek and Bushuk, 1968). Sidhu et al. (1980a) showed that fumaric acid formed an adduct with cysteine residues of glutenin, a reaction that probably proceeds via addition of the thiyl radical to the a,~ double bond of fumaric acid. The importance of stress-mediated scission of disulfide bonds in developing gluten is consonant with several lines of evidence. It is well known that increasing the absorption in a dough in the bakery increases the mixing time. Tipples and Kilborn (1977) found that the critical speed of mixing (the minimum mixing rpm necessary to achieve good loaf volume) increased as absorption increased. They could make a well-developed dough at 100% absorption (using a highquality Canadian wheat flour) by running the mixer at a high speed. As the dough consistency decreased, a higher rate of energy input was required to achieve the necessary stress to break disulfide bonds. The mixing time (at fixed {{page:280}} rpm) required to develop doughs is highly correlated with the amount of glutenin in the flour (Orth and Bushuk, 1972; Singh et at., 1990); more glutenin requires more energy input to be broken down and rearranged. As disulfide bonds are broken, they reform between adjacent molecules that have been aligned along the lines of stress in the dough. Several different combinations can be envisioned: 2-S* ~-S-S­ -S* + -SH ~ -S-S- + H* -S* + -S1-S2- ~ -S-S1- + -S2* The end result of these rearrangements is the linear glutenin polymers envisioned in Figure 11.5. A common picture of this process is simple thiol-disulfide interchange, as proposed by Goldstein (1957). This is unlikely, however, because such a reaction proceeds via nucleophilic attack of the thiolate anion on the disulfide. At dough pH (approximately 5) less than 0.1 % of the thiol groups would be ionized (pKa of -SH is approximately 8.5). These interchanges are more likely to involve a free radical mechanism, as described here. While rearrangement of glutenin is the major consumer of mixing energy, it is not the only process occurring. The protein also incorporates lipids from the flour and any added emulsifiers and shortening. Grosskreutz (1961) used X-ray studies to conclude that developed gluten has a lamellar structure, with lipid bilayers interleaved with protein layers. Other researchers (e.g. Chung, 1986) have proposed different models for the protein-lipid interaction. All that can be confidently stated is that most polar lipids and a significant fraction of non-polar lipids become tightly associated with the gluten protein (DeStefanis et ai., 1977; Chung et at., 1978). The precise role played by these included lipids in dough properties (and final loaf volume) is still not fully clarified (Pomeranz, 1985). The final result of development is thought to be an alignment of extended, nearly linear polypeptide chains, interacting through ionic and hydrophobic forces (Ewart, 1977). This will be discussed more fully below. Breakdown If mixing continues after peak development is reached the dough becomes softer, less resistant to mixing action, and loses its ability to retain gases during proofing. SEM photographs indicate that the protein strands become shorter and thicker compared with those in optimally mixed dough (Amend and Belitz, 1990). The viscosity of dough proteins extracted into I % sodium dodecyl sulfate solutions were lower in overmixed doughs compared to optimally mixed doughs, indicating a smaller average molecular weight (Danno and Hoseney, 1982). Several a,~-unsaturated carbonyl compounds, such as fumaric acid, maleic acid, sorbic acid, ferulic acid and N-ethylmaleimide all increase the rate of {{page:281}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION dough breakdown during mixing (Schroeder and Hoseney, 1978). 14C-Fumaric acid reacts with cysteinyl groups in gluten proteins during mixing, forming Ssuccinyl adducts (Sidhu et al., 1980a). It did not react with cysteine in soluble proteins or with added -SH compounds, leading the authors to conclude that it was combining with thiyl radicals on the gluten proteins. Flour water solubles also contribute to the breakdown phenomenon (Schroeder and Hoseney, 1978; see above). Presumably it is the ferulic acid present in the WS pentosans which causes this effect. Fumaric acid and sorbic acid have been suggested as agents for reducing mixing time; at normal levels of use, and in practical situations, their effect may be too powerful, and the practice has not been widely accepted. To summarize, dough breakdown appears to be simply a continuation of the process by which flour glutenin I is converted to (relatively) medium weight protein polymers that impart the desired rheological properties to dough. Unmixing Tipples and Kilborn (1975) reported an unusual phenomenon, the reversible decrease of resistance of a fully developed dough when it is mixed at a much lower rpm. When mixer speed is returned to that used for original development, dough consistency (and loaf volume potential) rapidly returns to that originally achieved. They termed this 'unmixing'. It is not the same thing as allowing a dough to rest (no mixing action). If a nearly developed dough is allowed to rest, when the mixer is restarted the consistency first drops to the level that would be the case if it were mixed at low speed, then rises to full consistency. An explanation that has been made (Ewart, 1977) is that with low-speed mixing the gluten molecules are no longer being constrained to extended parallel alignment by shear forces. They tend towards more random configurations, and the low-shear mixing allows these molecules (presumably somewhat more globular in shape) to form interactions that stabilize the less extended configurations. Air incorporation More than 50 years ago Baker and Mize (1941) showed that achieving a fine crumb grain depended, in part, on incorporating air into the dough and subdividing the air bubbles into small cells. These serve as nuclei for expansion of the gases formed during fermentation and baking. Junge et al. (1981) determined the course of air incorporation during mixing in a Mixograph (Figure 11.10). Little air is incorporated during the hydration and blending stages of mixing. Entrapment begins only after the dough begins to develop resistance to mixing and some internal structure that can envelop the air bubbles. An interesting point is that incorporation continues well past the mixing peak, into the breakdown portion of the mixogram. Thus it is not simply the elasticity of the dough that is responsible for entraining air; viscosity also seems to playa role (and perhaps also the ability of dough proteins to stabilize foams). {{page:282}} 1.10 ~ 'il) c: CD 0 1.15 ..c: C) ::I 0 0 o 5 2 3 4 6 7 Time, minutes Figure 11.10 Incorporation of air in dough mixed in a Mixograph (adapted from Junge et al., 1981). Chamberlain and Collins (1979) found an interesting corollary to the observation of Baker and Mize; the entrapped gas must contain some nitrogen. They mixed doughs under a pure oxygen atmosphere. The final bread had an extremely coarse grain, with only a few large cells. Their conclusion was that yeast consumed all the oxygen during early stages of fermentation, leaving relatively few nuclei for expansion of fermentation gases during proofing and baking, resulting in large voids in the bread (see also Chapters 2 and 4). The gluten matrix The final product of dough mixing is a viscoelastic mass that, after appropriate proofing and baking, produces an aerated solid called bread. Bread has a sponge-like structure (the voids are interconnected) with the structural elements being primarily gelatinized starch and denatured protein. The rheological characteristics of dough are primarily responsible for achieving the desired result. Dough rheology, however, is (or should be) traceable to the nature of the matrix elements which are, in this case, gluten proteins. A great deal of dough research has to do with measuring its rheological characteristics, correlating them with bread characteristics (the effects of additives such as oxidants, reductants and surfactants, proofing behavior, loaf volume and crumb grain), and attempting to connect those measurements with such physical characteristics of gluten as can be determined. Much of this research has been presented and reviewed. Some excellent sources (but by no means the only ones) are Bloksma and Bushuk (1988); Bloksma (1990a,b); Faridi and Faubion (1990); Hoseney and Rogers (1990) and Eliasson and Larsson (1993). {{page:283}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION While much more is known about dough now than, say, 50 years ago, the current situation might be summarized as follows: • dough is an extremely complicated system that cannot be fully described in simple rheological terms (springs and dashpots); • many practical instruments make measurements that are difficult to interpret in fundamental rheological terms, and mayor may not be applicable to events during proofing and baking; • statements about the structure of gluten protein polymers are still largely hypothetical; • there is great scope for further fundamental research in this area. I intend to sound realistic, not negative, in this summary. The following discussion is not a detailed consideration of either rheology or protein structure. Rather, salient points from many publications will be chosen, to highlight certain significant findings that relate to the overall breadmaking process. The intention is to formulate a hypothetical framework, hopefully raising useful questions for guiding further research. Dough rheology Numerous discussions of dough rheology are available. The chapter by Menjivar (1993) clearly presents basic rheological concepts, while Bloksma and Bushuk (1988) apply them more specifically to dough. An important point is that two types of stress are involved: shear and extensional (Figure 11.11). In shear stress opposing forces are applied parallel to each other, in opposite directions to the matrix element (Figure ll.1la). A strain is set up at right angles to the two surfaces. If it remains constant (and the element returns to its original shape when stress is relieved) the deformation is elastic, and elastic (a) C1 III 11_ Extenslon~ +{ ~/ (b) ~ 1"--___ -----") '------- Stress Figure 11.11 Diagram of shear and extensIOnal deformation {{page:284}} modulus is defined as: E = stress/strain. Intuitively, E is larger for more 'solid' materials; a cube of hard rubber has much higher value of E than a cube of sponge rubber. If the strain decreases as a function of time, then when stress is relieved the element does not return to its original shape, and the deformation is viscous. For a simple (Newtonian) fluid viscosity is defined as /J = stress/strain rate. In a dough mixer, Mixograph or Farinograph shear stress is the dominant mode. In extensional stress the opposing forces are applied in opposite directions, but at the opposite faces of the matrix element (Figure 11.11b). The definitions of elastic modulus and viscosity are the same as in shear stress, but the dimensional effects on the element are different. Whereas in shear the element maintains the same cross-section, in extension the cross-section decreases as the element lengthens (the volume remains the same in both cases). Extensional stress is applied to a dough by the Extensograph or Alveograph, and also during fermentation (proofing) and baking (oven spring). Dough is viscoelastic, that is, it has both viscous and elastic characteristics. The simplest mechanical model that can be used to interpret rheological studies on dough is the Burgers body (Figure 11.12). When stress is applied to dough the immediate response is elastic deformation (element A), followed by a D c B Figure 11.12 The Burgers body mechanical model of dough rheology. {{page:285}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION delayed elastic response due to stretching of element B as element C undergoes viscous flow. Viscous flow by element D relaxes the instantaneous elastic strain on A. When the stress is relieved, any remaining elastic deformation of A is immediately removed. The removal of strain on element B is relieved only as C undergoes viscous flow (in the opposite direction). There is no force to reverse the flow that has occurred in D, so that amount of dough deformation remains when final equilibrium is reached. A typical creep and recovery curve is shown in Figure 1l.13. The strain (deformation) continues as long as stress is maintained on the dough piece. The contributions of the various elements of the Burgers body can be identified on the curves, based on the previous discussion. However, it should be noted that each element is a composite of many elastic and viscous elements in the dough, so that element A (for example; Figure 11.12) actually represents a spectrum of elastic moduli and D comprises a range of viscosities. By collating the results of many such creep and recovery studies an equation relating apparent dough viscosity (element D) to shear stress (Bloksma and Bushuk, 1988, Figs 6 and 7) was developed. Dough is a shear-thinning material, and its viscosity was calculated as l.6 x 105 Pa s at a shear rate of 1O-3/s and l.1 x 102 Pa s at a shear rate of 102/s. Bloksma (l990a) presents some figures relating shear rates in various laboratory instruments to the situation in dough. They are: • dough mixers, 1O-100/s; • Farinograph, Mixograph, lO/s; • Extensograph, Alveograph, O.I-1/s; a 020 0.15 ... - t: m 010 CJ) b 005 C 0 10.000 6000 8000 2000 4000 0 Time, sec. Figure 11.13 A tYPical creep and recovery curve for dough under extensIOnal stress (a) Stress mamtamed throughout, (b) stress removed after 4000 s, (c) stress removed after 1000 s (adapted from Hibberd and Parker, 1979) {{page:286}} • proofing, 10--4 to 1O-3/s; • baking (oven spring), 1O-3/s; The problem with relating test results to actual dough function thus becomes apparent. Extensograph and Alveograph testing involves dough with a viscosity of (2-8) x 103 Pa s (calculated according to equation 1 of Bloksma and Bushuk, 1988), some two orders of magnitude lower than viscosity in proofing dough. While results from such testing may correlate with dough properties (and qualities such as loaf volume), these should not be taken as 'explanations' of what is actually occurring in the dough. A typical extensogram is shown in Figure 11.14. The parameters of interest are R (the height of the curve at 5 cm extension), E (the length of curve until the dough piece breaks) and A (the area under the curve). A dough having large values of R but small E is extremely 'bucky', while one with small values of R and large E is very soft and pliable. Extensogram curves have been transformed into stress-strain diagrams (Raspar, 1975) but little use has been made of this work. More often, one or more of these measurements is correlated with dough properties. One example is the report by Singh et al. (1990), where they found that E, R and A for a series of 15 flours were all highly correlated with final loaf volume (the three parameters were strongly intercorrelated, as might be expected, so there was really only one Extensograph test of loaf volume potential). Bloksma (1990b) expresses the opinion that: The only rheological properties required for good breadmaking performance appear to be extensibility and a sufficiently large viscosity. Extensibility can be translated into structure; a large quantity of high-molecular-mass glutenins enhances extensibility. The latter of these two conditions, a large viscosity, is met by virtually all doughs; it has no discriminating power. B Extensibility Time and extension Figure 11.14 An extensogram. A, Dough having good elasticity and good breadmaking properties; B, dough with poor elasticity and poor breadmaking properties. {{page:287}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION Before considering the meaning of the term extensibility, we must think about the structure to which Bloksma refers. Gluten structure Meredith (1964) proposed that in a developed dough the gluten consists virtually of one giant molecule, comprising glutenin extensively crosslinked by disulfide and other bonds. The comparison was made (by other authors) to vulcanized rubber. Bloksma (1990a and references therein) pointed out that this comparison was invalid; temperature changes had opposite effects on the elastic and viscous moduli for dough and for rubber. Ewart (1968, 1977) pointed out that there were several other lines of evidence that substantiated rejection of the 'giant molecule' hypothesis, and proposed that gluten structure was due to interactions between long, linear glutenin polymers. He made the analogy between dough 'strength' and the strength of a rope; while rope fibers are not physically crosslinked, the longitudinal forces between fibers give it a high elastic modulus (resistance to deformation in extensional shear). The glutenin 'fibers' impart elasticity to dough by virtue of the (non-covalent) bonds between them. The linear glutenin hypothesis of Ewart envisions numerous long glutenin molecules, aligned somewhat as shown in Figure 11.15A. The contribution of gliadin to dough properties cannot be ignored (Weegels et al., 1990; van Lonkbuijsen et aI., 1992). The scheme in Figure 11.l5B includes gliadin moleB. Glutenin plus Gliadin A. Linear Glutenin Figure 11.15 Models of the structure of gluten (A) The Imear glutemn hypothesIs (Ewart, 1977), (B) mciuslOn of ghadm m the structure {{page:288}} cules, which contribute to the interactions between glutenin chains. Some of the possible consequences for dough rheology due to these models are discussed below. Bonding between protein chains There are three possible types of non-covalent bonds in dough: ionic, hydrogen and hydrophobic bonds (Wehrli and Pomeranz, 1969). Glutenin has a low density of ionizable (acidic and basic) amino acids, so that such bonds would appear to be relatively unimportant in dough. At low pH (for example, in a sponge subjected to long fermentation with consequent formation of much acetic and lactic acid) protonation of the few carboxylic side chains present leads to a significant net positive charge on gluten proteins, weakening interchain interactions by ionic repulsion. The high percentage of amide (glutamine) side chains contributes to extensive hydrogen bonding between chains. The importance of this interaction to gluten elasticity was clearly demonstrated by Beckwith et al. (1963). They treated gluten with methanolic hydrochloric acid, converting amide groups to esters. Conversion increased solubility, decreased intrinsic viscosity of protein solutions and decreased cohesion of the hydrated gluten. Individual hydrogen bonds are relatively weak (about 4.2-6.3 J/mol or 1-1.5 kcal/mol) but the presence of large numbers of them lends overall strength to the interchain interactions. The fact that the resistance of dough to elastic deformation decreases with increasing temperature (Bloksma and Nieman, 1975) emphasizes the importance of hydrogen bonds in the proteins. Besides interchain bonding, hydrogen bonds also stabilize the ~-tum spirals in the central portions of glutenin molecules. These play a role in the interpretation of elasticity presented below. The relative importance of hydrophobic bonding in dough is difficult to assess accurately. When a dough is mixed in deuterium oxide (D20) rather than ordinary water (HP) it is much more elastic (Hoseney, 1976). Both hydrogen (deuterium) bonds and hydrophobic bonds are stronger in the presence of Dp, so this test is not decisive. The addition of various salts, however, does discriminate between the two types of bonds. The Hofmeister (lyotropic) series arranges ions according to their ability to 'salt in' (increase hydration of) proteins as well as other hydrophobic materials. This is interpreted as being primarily an effect on water structure. Lyotropic salts (e.g. magnesium thiocyanate) decrease water structure and increase solubility of ('salt in') hydrophobic chains. Non-lyotropic salts (e.g. sodium chloride and sodium phosphate) enhance water structure and decrease solubility of ('salt out') hydrophobic chains (Tanford, 1973). (The term 'chaotropic' is used synonymously with lyotropic. The advantage is its mnemonic nature; a chaotrope is an ion or molecule that increases the 'chaos' in water structure.) The effect of salts on dough elasticity, absorption and mixing tolerance has been studied by numerous authors (Salovaara, 1982; Kinsella and {{page:289}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION Hale, 1984; Holmes and Hoseney, 1987). Lyotropic salts (e.g. sodium thiocyanate) increased water absorption by the protein (enhanced its solubility in water), while non-lyotropic salts (e.g. sodium fluoride) decreased absorption. The reported results have been interpreted in terms of protein hydration (Stauffer, 1990), but they can equally well point to the role of hydrophobic bonds in gluten structure. Glutenin and gliadin are rather hydrophobic proteins, as shown by numerous studies using gel chromatography on hydrophobic media such as phenylsepharose (Chung and Pomeranz, 1979; Weegels et aZ., 1990). Chung and Pomeranz (1979) found that acid-soluble glutenin extracted from a good-quality flour was more hydrophobic than that from a poor-quality flour. Hydrophobic gliadins increase bread loaf volume, while hydrophilic gliadins decrease loaf volume (Weegels et aI., 1990; van Lonkhuijsen et aZ., 1992). Flour lipids (Daniels et aZ., 1976; Wootton, 1976) and added emulsifiers (DeStefanis et aZ., 1977) are bound to gluten during dough mixing, which must be in large part due to hydrophobic interactions. Hydrophobic interactions are weaker than hydrogen bonds (approximately 2500 J or 600 cal per CH2 group) but again, because of the rather large number of available interaction sites, the overall contribution to gluten structure is significant. The relative contributions of ionic, hydrogen and hydrophobic bonds to aggregation of glutenin proteins were estimated to be 17.3, 56.3 and 26.4%, respectively, in a good-quality gluten, and 12.8, 80.1 and 7.1 %, respectively, in a poor-quality gluten (Vakar and Kopakova, 1976). In discussing chain interactions in gluten, then, hydrogen bonding (glutamine side chains) is of primary importance, and hydrophobic interactions playa lesser, but not negligible, role, particularly when lipids are involved. Gluten elasticity What is the source of gluten elasticity? A reasonable hypothesis (Tatham et aZ., 1985) is that ~-tum spirals, and the hydrogen bonding between them (which connects them into ~ sheet structures), can be slightly extended and act as springs (Figure 11.16A). Under stress, hydrogen bonds can be slightly extended. While each such extension might amount to only a fraction of a nanometre, summed over many thousands (or even millions) of such deformations, the total dough deformation can amount to several percent, as indicated in Figure 11.13. While Tatham et aZ. (1985) proposed an analogy with elastin, Bloksma (1990b) pointed out that elasticity in the two proteins has opposite temperature dependence. A second source of elasticity could be entropic. Ewart (1977) considered the individual glutenin molecules to be roughly spherical in shape; several such spheres are concatenated to form the 'linear glutenin' of his hypothesis. Under stress each glutenin molecule could be extended (Figure 11.16B) into a less-favorable configuration. Relieving stress allows the protein molecule to recoil to its {{page:290}} s-s~s-s Extensional .. A s-s" s-s -~ ~ -1 f f , , , I Shear Extensional .. B Shear Figure 11.16 A proposal for the source of glutenin elasticity. (A) Extension of the ~-turn spirals and sheets, (B) deformation of compact glutenin molecules into a more linear configuration. preferred (lower-energy) state. A similar picture has been suggested by Amend (1995), based upon SEM pictures of extended (stretched) gluten membranes. Gluten viscosity For a dough to undergo viscous flow the glutenin molecules must move relative to each other. Several mechanisms have been proposed by which this might occur. At the time Goldstein (1957) suggested sulfhydryl--disulfide interchange as such a mechanism, disulfide crosslinks were considered to be the most important feature of gluten structure. Today that picture of the 'giant molecule' seems unlikely, for reasons given above. In a freshly mixed dough, however, thiyl free radicals appear to be present. These disappear during a 10 min resting period (Graveland et al., 1985), probably through interaction with disulfide bonds. Thus during this relaxation period (bulk fermentation or floortime in common parlance) the dough undergoes viscous flow (releasing elastic stress) via thiyl-disulfide interchange. Movement of glutenin molecules is more likely to occur via hydrogen bond and hydrophobic bond interchange. Some of this may happen as a result of molecular motion and Brownian movement (Figure 11.17 A). A certain fraction of the hydrogen bonds between chains can be disrupted, and one chain move relative to another, before re-establishing hydrogen bonds. This happens more readily at higher temperatures, and dough viscosity decreases by a factor of five over the range 26-60°C (79-140°F) (Bloksma, 1990a). Gliadin may also play a role as a mobile, small-molecule intermediary of these interchanges (Figure 11.17B). While gliadin can certainly interact via hydrogen bonding because it contains a higher percentage of glutamine than glutenin, the fact that its hydrophobicity contributes to bread quality indicates involvement of this aspect of its nature, as emphasized in Figure 11.17B. By facilitating the movement of adjacent glutenin molecules, gliadin may be characterized as 'molecular ball bearings'. {{page:291}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION B ' Hydrophobic patch I A Disulfide bond Hydrogen bond Figure 11.17 VISCOUS flow and dough relaxatIOn (A) Browman motion and cham realIgnments, (B) mvolvement of ghadm m glutemn reahgnment A portion of gluten viscosity may be simply due to a high concentration of macromolecules in the aqueous phase. The viscosity of gum solutions increases tenfold for each 1 % increase in concentration. The concentration of glutenin can be estimated at 15% as a lower boundary. Solutions of non-gelling gums at this concentration show a viscosity of the order of 106 Pa s or more. Viscosity is also strongly dependent on the average molecular weight of the protein, and glutenin molecular weights are of the order of 106 Da. Even if there were no interactions between glutenin chains, one would intuitively predict a high viscosity for a suspension such as that found in dough. The postulated formation of links between gluten proteins and WS pentosans (Hoseney and Faubion, 1981; Figure 11.3) must not be overlooked. To the extent that this happens in dough, the glycoprotein (pentosan-glutenin) would have an even higher molecular weight than the glutenin complex alone, thus increasing viscosity. It would also hinder relaxation (Figure 11.17), increasing dough elasticity. Extensibility Extensibility is difficult to define in precise rheological terms, although it is easy to find familiar instances; bubble gum, taffy (toffee) and bread dough are three homely examples. Under extensional stress, the material thins out to form a {{page:292}} TECHNOLOGY OF BREAOMAKING membrane. At the limit of extensibility, holes appear in the membrane and expand as extension continues. In the Extensograph this corresponds to the distance the center of the dough piece (of defined initial dimensions) can be stretched before the dough ruptures. To some degree this distance depends on the rate of extension; at a lower rate the dough will extend further before rupturing. Thus, viscous flow is involved to some degree. Elasticity is involved in defining the amount of stress that can be applied before the dough piece breaks (tensile strength). With a less elastic dough the amount of extenSIOn may be the same as for a more elastic one, but the actual stress at rupture will be higher for the more elastic dough (Figure 11.14). Slade et al. (1989) show polarized light photomicrographs of stretched films of a synthetic chewing gum base (polyisobutylene elastomer) and of gluten. The similarities between the two photographs are striking (their Figures 17 and 18). These films were stretched in one direction, and the authors point out that film strength is maximum along that axis, and minimum at right angles. Holes begin to form when the fibrils separate laterally, and the holes expand perpendicularly to the direction of stretching. In bread dough during proofing and expansion of gas cells, and in the Alveograph, extension of dough is biaxial with the gluten film being stretched along both dimensions. (In the third dimension, perpendicular to the film surface, the membrane grows thinner.) This results in the maximum strength for gluten membranes. Bloksma (1990a) reviews at some length the various components of extensibility (viscosity, elasticity and tensile strength) that influence the overall performance of a dough during proofing and balang. WhIle these stages of breadmaking are beyond the scope of this chapter, his discussion emphasizes that all those factors of importance to the baker are developed during dough mixing. In other words, he confirms the experience of every bakery technical service person: if a bakery is having trouble producing good bread, one of the first places to look is at the mixer. If the mixing is right, the rest of the process should be relatively trouble-free. References Amend, T and BelItz, H -0 (1990) The formatIOn of dough and gluten - a study by scanmng electron Illlcroscopy Zeltschriftfur Lebensmlttel Untersuchung Forschungen, 190,401-9 Amend, T (1995) Oer Mechamsmus der Telgblldung VorstoB m den molekularen Strukturberelch Getrelde Mehl und Brat, 49, 359-62 Bailey, C H (1941) A translatIOn of Beccarl's lecture 'concermng gram' (1729) Cereal ChemIstry, 18,555-61 Baker, J C and Mlze, M D (1941) The ongm of the gas cel1m bread dough Cereal Chemistry. 18, 19-34 BeckWith, A C, Wall, J S and Dlmler, R J (1963) Amide groups as mteractlOn sites m wheat gluten protems effects of arrude--ester converSIOn Archives of BIOchemistry and BIOphYSICS, 103, 319-30 Bemardm, J E and Kasarda, D D (1973) Hydrated protem flbnls from wheat endosperm Cereal Chemistry, 50, 529-36 {{page:293}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION Bloksma, A Hand Bushuk, W (1988) Rheology and chemistry of dough, m Wheat Chemistry and Technology, 3rd edn (ed Y Pomeranz), Amencan AssociatIOn of Cereal Chemists, St Paul, MN, pp 131-217 Bloksma, A H and Nieman, W (1975) The effect of temperature on some rheologIcal properties of wheat flour doughs Journal of Texture Studies, 6, 343-61 Bloksma, A H (l990a) Rheology of the breadmakmg process Cereal Foods World, 35, 228-36 Bloksma, A H (l990b) Dough structure, dough rheology, and bakmg quality Cereal Foods World, 35,237-44 Bushuk, W (1966) DlstnbutlOn of water m dough and bread Bakers' DIgest, 40(5), 38-40 Bushuk, W (1985) Flour protems Structure and functIOnality m dough and bread Cereal Foods World, 30, 447-51 Chamberlam, Nand Collms, T H (1979) The Chorleywood Bread Process the role of oxygen and mtrogen Bakers' DIgest, 53(1), 18-24 Chung, 0 K and Pomeranz, Y (1979) ACid-soluble protems of wheat flours II Bmdmg to hydrophobic gels Cereal Chemistry, 56,196-201 Chung, 0 K (1986) Lipid-protem mteractlOns m wheat flour, dough, gluten, and protem fractIOns Cereal Foods World, 31, 242-56 Chung, 0 K, Pomeranz, Y and Fmney, K F (1978) Wheat flour lipids m breadmakmg Cereal Chemistry, 55, 598-618 Dame1s, N W R , Wendy-Richmond, J , Russell-Eggltt, P Wand Coppock, J B M (1976) Studies on the lipids of flour III Lipid bmdmg m breadmakmg Journal of SCience of Food and Agnculture, 17, 20-9 Danno, G and Hoseney, R C (1982) Effects of dough mlXlng and rheologlcally aclive compounds on relative vIscosity of wheat protems Cereal Chemistry, 59,196-8 DeStefams, V A, Ponte, J G Jr, Chung, F Hand Ruzza, N A (1977) Bmdmg of crumb softeners and dough strengtheners dunng breadmakmg Cereal Chemistry, 54, 13-24 Dronzek, Band Bushuk, W (1968) A note on the formatIOn of free radicals m dough dunng mlXlng Cereal Chemistry, 45, 286 Eltasson, A -C and Larsson, K (1993) Cereals m Breadmakmg - a Molecular CollOIdal Approach, Marcel Dekker, New York Ewart, J A D (1968) A hypotheSIS for the structure and rheology of glutenm Journal of Sczence of Food and Agnculture, 19, 617-23 Ewart, J A D (1977) Re-exammatJon of the ltnear gluten hypotheSIS Journal of SCIence of Food and Agnculture, 28, 191-9 Fandl, H and FaubIOn, J M (eds) (1990) Dough Rheology and Baked Product Texture, Van Nostrand Remhold, New York Gao, L, Ng, P K Wand Bushuk, W (1992) Structure of glutenm based on farmograph and electrophoretic results Cereal ChemIstry, 69, 452-5 Gelssman, T and Neukom, H (1973) On the compOSItIon of the water-soluble wheat flour pentosans and their oXldalive gelatIOn Lebensmutel Wlssenschaft und Technologle, 6, 59-62 Goldstem, S (1957) Sulfhydryl und DlsulfIdgruppen der Kleberelwelsse und Ihre Bezelhung zur Backfahlgkelt der Brotmehle Mutellungen Geblete Lebensmutel und HygIene (Bern), 48, 87-93 Graveland, A , Bosveld, P , Llchtendonk, W J et al (\ 985) A model for the molecular structure of the glutemn of wheat flour Journal of Cereal SCience, 3, 1-16 Greenwood, C T (1976) Starch, m Advances m Cereal SCience and Technology, Vol I (ed Y Pomeranz) Amencan ASSOCIatIOn of Cereal Chemists, St Paul, MN, pp 119-57 Greer, E N and Steward, B A (1959) The water absorptIOn of wheat flour relative effects of protem and starch Journal of SCience of Food and Agnculture, 10, 248-52 Grosskreutz, J C (J 961) A hpoprotem model of wheat gluten structure Cereal Chemistry, 38, 336-49 He, Hand Hoseney, R C (1990) Gluten A theory of how It controls bread makmg qualtty, m Gluten Protems 1990 (eds W Bushuk and R Tkachuk), Amencan ASSOCiatIOn of Cereal Chemists, St Paul, MN, pp 1-10 Hibberd, G E and Parker, N S (1979) Nonlmear creep and recovery curve of wheat-flour doughs Cereal ChemIstry, 56, 232-6 Holmes, J T and Hoseney, R C (1987) Chenucalleavemng effect of pH and certam IOns on breadmakmg properties Cereal ChemIstry, 64, 343-8 Hoseney, R C (1985) The mlXlng phenomenon Cereal Foods World, 30, 453-7 {{page:294}} Hoseney, R C and Rogers, D E (1990) The formatIOn and properties of wheat flour doughs Critical ReViews of Food SCience and NutritIOn, 29, 73-93 Hoseney, R C (1976) Dough formmg properties Journal of the American 011 Chemists SOCiety, 56, 78A-81A Hoseney, R C and FaubIOn, J M (1981) A mechamsm for the oXldauve gelatIOn of wheat flour water-soluble pentosans Cereal Chemistry, 58, 421-4 Jones, I K , PhillipS, J Wand Hlrd, F J R (1974) The estimatIOn of rheologlcally Important thlOl and dlsulphlde groups m dough Journal of SCience of Food and Agriculture, 25, 1-10 Junge, R C, Hoseney, R C and Varnano-Marston, E (1981) Effect of surfactants on aIr mcorporatlon m dough and the crumb graIn of bread Cereal Chemistry, 58, 338-42 Kaczkowski, J , Kos, S and PlOr, H (1990) Gliadm hydrophobicity and breadmaking potential, m Gluten Proteins 1990 (eds W Bushuk and R Tkachuk), Amencan ASSOCiatIOn of Cereal Chenusts, St Paul, MN, pp 66-70 Kasarda, D D (1989) Glutenm structure m relation to wheat qUality, m Wheat IS Umque (ed Y Pomeranz), Amencan ASSOCiatIOn of Cereal Chenusts, St Paul, MN, pp 277-302 Kim, S K and D' Appoloma, B L (1977) Bread stahng studies III Effect of pentosans on dough, bread, and bread staling rate Cereal Chemistry, 54, 225-9 Kmsella, J E and Hale, M L (1984) HydrophobiC associatIOns and gluten consistency effect of speCifiC amons Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 32, 1054-6 MenJivar, J A (1993) FundaJllental aspects of dough rheology, m Dough Rheology and Baked Product Texture (eds H Fandl and J M FaubIOn), Van Nostrand Remhold, New York Meredith, P (1964) A theory of gluten structure Cereal SCience Today, 9, 33-4, 54 Mlchmewlcz, J, Billadens, C G and Bushuk, W (1990) Water-msoluble pentosans of wheat composItion and some phYSical properties Cereal Chemistry, 67, 434-9 Neukom, Hand Markwalder, H U (1978) OXidative gelatIOn of wheat flour pentosans a new way of cross-Imking polymers Cereal Foods World, 23, 374-6 Orth, R A and Bushuk, W (1972) A comparative study of the protems of wheats of diverse bakmg quahtles Cereal Chemistry, 49, 268-75 Osborne, T B (1907) The Proteins of the Wheat Kernel, Carnegie Institute of Washmgton, Washmgton, DC Paul, S K, Fmney, K F , Shogren, M D and Tsen, C C (1976) Water-soluble pentosans of wheat flour III Effect of water-soluble pentosans on loaf volume of reconstituted gluten and starch doughs Cereal Chemistry, 53, 347-54 Pomeranz, Y (1985) Wheat flour lipids - what they can and cannot do m bread Cereal Foods World, 30,443-6 Pyler, E J (1988) Baking SCience and Technology, Sosland Pubhshmg Co, Kansas City, MO, Chapter 14 Rasper, V F (1975) Dough rheology at large deformatIOns m Simple tenSile mode Cereal Chemistry, 52, 24r-41r Redman, D G, Axford, D W E and Elton, G A H (1966) Mechamcally produced radicals m flour Chemistry and Industry, 1298-9 Salovaara, H (1982) Effect of partial sodIUm chlonde replacement by potassIUm chlonde or some other salts on wheat dough rheology and breadmaking Cereal Chemistry, 59, 422-6 Schroeder, L F and Hoseney, R C (1978) Mlxograph studies II Effect of activated double-bond compounds on dough-nuxmg properties Cereal Chemistry, 55, 348-60 Sidhu, J S , Nordm, P and Hoseney, R C (1980a) MlXograph studies III ReactIOn of fumanc aCid With gluten protems dunng dough mlXmg Cereal Chemistry, 57, 159-63 Sidhu, J S, Hoseney, R C, FaubIOn, J and Nordm, P (1980b) ReactIOn of 14C-cysteme With wheat flour water solubles under ultraVIOlet light Cereal Chemistry, 57, 380-2 Smgh, N K, Donovan, R and MacRltchle, F (1990) Use of somcatlOn and size-exclusIOn hlghperformance liqUid chromatography m the study of wheat flour protems II Relative quantity of glutemn as a measure ofbreadmakmg quality Cereal Chemistry, 67,161-70 Slade, L, Levme, Hand Fmley, J W (1989) Protem-water mteractlOns water as a plastiCizer of gluten and other protem polymers, m Protein Quality and the Effects of ProceSSing (eds R D Philhps and J W Fmley), Marcel Dekker, New York and Basel, pp 9-124 Stauffer, C E (1990) FunctIOnal Addltlves for Bakery Foods, Van Nostrand Remhold, New York Tanford, C (1973) The HydrophobiC Effect, John Wiley & Sons, New York Tatham, AS, Mlflm, B J and Shewry, P R (1985) The beta-tum conformatIOn m wheat gluten protems Relationship to gluten elastiCity Cereal Chemistry, 62, 405-12 {{page:295}} PRINCIPLES OF DOUGH FORMATION Tipples, K H and Kilborn, R H (1975) 'Ururuxmg' - the dlsonentatlOn of developed bread doughs by slow speed rrnxmg Cereal ChemIstry, 52, 248-62 Tipples, K H and Kilborn, R H (1977) Factors affectmg mecharucal dough development V Influence of rest penod on rrnxmg and 'unrrnxmg' charactensttcs of dough Cereal ChemIstry, 54,92-109 Tipples, K H, Meredith, J 0 and Holas, J (1978) Factors affectmg fannograph and bakmg absorption II Relattve mfluence of flour components Cereal ChemIstry, 55, 652-60 Vakar, A Band Kopakova, V V (1976) Solublhty of the gluterun fractIOn of gluten Vestn Skh Nauk (Moscow), p 45 (quoted 10 He and Hoseney, 1990) van Lonkhu1Jsen, H J , Hamer, R J and Schreuder, C (1992) Influence of specific ghadms on the breadmakmg quality of wheat Cereal ChemIstry, 69,174--7 Weegels, P L , Marseille, J P , de Jasger, A M and Hamer, R J (1990) Structure-functIOn relatIOnships of gluten protems, 10 Gluten Protems 1990 (eds W Bushuk and R Tkachuk), Amencan Assoclatton of Cereal Cherrnsts, St Paul, MN, pp 98-111 Wehrh, H P and Pomeranz, Y (1969) The role of cherrncal bonds 10 dough Bakers' DIgest, 43(6), 22-6 Wootton, M (1976) Bmdmg and extractablhty of wheat flour hpld after dough fonnatton Journal of SCIence of Food and Agriculture, 17,297-301 {{page:313}}
