---
book: "Technology of Breadmaking"
book_slug: "cauvain-technology-of-breadmaking"
author: "Stanley P. Cauvain & Linda S. Young"
lang: "en"
relevance: "core"
chapter: "Chapter 12: Flour milling"
heading: "Chapter 12: Flour milling"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 12: Flour milling"]
order: 12
source_page: 313
tokens_est: 22579
---

# Chapter 12: Flour milling

{{page:313}} PAUL CATTERALL Introduction Question - is flour milling an art or a science? Answer - it is neither. It is a technology, the marrying of food science with the art of the practical miller, both of which have evolved over many years. Some may say that science will eventually overcome the art of milling and consign the practical miller to the flour bin of history, but with the variety of baking products still expanding daily and new wheat varieties being developed that event should still be quite a long time off. This chapter aims to help define the science and the art of a process which produces one of the most versatile of bakery raw materials and aims to provide a background to the link between wheat, the milling process and the properties of the final flour. Wheat has been a major food source for thousands of years. The unique properties of its proteins when hydrated have given it a flexibility which has made it ideal for a multitude of different bread products from the flat breads of the Mediterranean and equatorial countries, e.g. chapatti, pizza and ciabatta, through to the sandwich breads of Europe, America and Australia. We must remember that the wheat grain is a seed that is designed to protect the embryonic plant from the rigours of the outside world until conditions are right for its growth. A representation of the structure of the wheat grain is given in Figure 12.1. The outer bran coat, together with a unique physical structure which folds the seed in on itself to form the characteristic crease, helps it do this job of protection particularly well. As a result of this complex shape, milling engineers have spent many a sleepless night trying to find ways of breaking through these protective layers to extract the endosperm with its maximum food value. In the beginning Flour milling can trace it origins back to prehistory, but the modem systems known as gradual reduction flour mills have only been developed over the last 200-300 years. Early humanity used pestles and mortars to grind wheat, pounding it to make a crude wholemeal flour. This basic milling technique developed into saddle rubbing stones and eventually to rotary grinding stones, with evidence for use of the latter dating back 7500 years. While initially the latter would have been hand operated, as communities developed larger stones with increased capacity were used powered by animals and later water. New power © Thomson Science 1998 {{page:297}} FLOUR MILLING -~~-Sfarchy endosperm Alerone layer Peric a --..11'--- G e r m Figure 12.1 The wheat grain (not to scale). sources were developed over the centuries; wind power has been used since the twelfth century and steam was introduced in the eighteenth century, but whatever the power source the basic principle of grinding wheat grains between two stones to produce a flour remained unaltered. In fact, even in today's highly technological society, wheat ground to flour between two stones is perceived by some to be a superior product. This basic one-pass system does have its drawbacks in that the bran skins and germ are ground as finely as the endosperm and the separation of these parts can be difficult. To overcome this a system was developed by French and Hungarian millers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries which linked together several sets of stone mills, the gap between each pair of stones being set slightly closer than the one before. After each pass the resultant flour was sieved, and some bran separated before the remaining material was sent to the next set of stones. As a result flour colour improved and a 'white' flour was produced. The development of the gradual reduction flour milling process had begun. The modern flour-milling process The principles of modern milling are still very much the same as described for stone grinding above, except that now the wheat is ground between pairs of {{page:298}} cast-iron rolls before the stocks are sieved and then reground. At each grinding stage a little flour will be produced and up to four or five other sieve separations are made. Because the particle sizes of the various sieve fractions will differ, they will all be treated separately on different rolls. At first sight the system in a modem flour mill appears to be quite complicated, but I will endeavour, over the next few pages, to shed some light on the whole process to help make it easier for the student to follow. We will start with the very first stage, when the wheat arrives at the mill. Delivery of the wheat Flour mills are built to be near their major source of wheat supply. At the beginning of the twentieth century they were built at ports to take advantage of imported grain. Those built inland were built adjacent to canals, rivers and railways to minimize the cost of transport. Large 20 000 tonne bulk grain carriers are still used to transport wheat around the world by sea, and small 1500 tonne coasters are used in more local waters. However, with costs being an important factor in all industries, many countries wanted to use more of their home-grown wheats. This desire prompted a response by wheat breeders which has led to the development of wheat varieties with improved breadmaking performance, and imports can therefore be reduced. In consequence the dependence on port mills has declined. Mills can now be built closer to the wheat growing areas and the raw material transported by road. When wheat arrives on the mill site it will need to be sampled so that tests can be carried out to determine quality against the buying specification. Sampling has to be done efficiently so that the results obtained from the tests are representative of the whole load. Generally sampling is done in one of two ways: • Using a manual spear. This method requires the operative to climb on top of the load and force the spear into the grain. Turning the handles takes a range of samples at various points up the spear. Whilst this system is simple and cheap it is prone to abuse. Pushing the spear vertically into a load is very difficult, and the temptation will always be to push it in at a shallower angle, with the result that wheat in the bottom of the lorry will not be sampled. Walking on the load to sample it is an unacceptable practice for a foodstuff and as a result many more mills are changing to the pneumatic sampler. • Using a pneumatic sampler. This type of sampling spear is far more reliable. It can either be steered manually, or pre-programmed to follow a defined sampling pattern, and is driven vertically down into the wheat to take samples at all depths. The intake operative no longer has to walk on the wheat, so that the risk of contamination is reduced although the lack of personal contact does have a slight disadvantage in that it puts a greater emphasis on the laboratory staff to pick up problems, such as contamination and taints, which previously could have been more readily spotted in the lorry. {{page:299}} FLOUR MILLING Wheat testing On arrival in the mill laboratory the wheat sample is thoroughly blended to ensure that the results which will be obtained are representative of the whole delivery. It is important that tests are carried out on the wheat prior to tipping the lorry for the following reasons: • to ensure the wheat is of the quality required; • to make sure it is not contaminated with foreign bodies or infested; • to ensure it will be stored with wheats of similar quality. The tests carried out will vary according to the type of mill, and the flour being produced, but will generally include some or all of the following. Appearance, off-odours and taints. Initially the wheat is inspected by trained laboratory staff who will be looking for any unusual odours, but they will mostly be looking for mustiness from damp, mouldy wheat, or evidence of contamination from the lorry, either a previous load, or even from the fuel used. Screenings (impurities). Screenings is a general term applied to all impurities in a parcel of wheat. They can be divided into two main types, intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic impurities are those which are reasonably associated with the wheat itself, but for obvious reasons are not required in the finished flour, e.g. shrivelled or diseased grain, straw, the seeds of weeds or crops growing in the vicinity of the wheat (cockle, millet bindweed, etc.) and ergot. The latter is a fungus associated with wheat but more commonly with rye. It appears as dark purple structures which replace the individual ears of grain and can contain ergotoxin, a poison that may lead to abortion in both humans and livestock. Extrinsic impurities are contaminants of wheat which should not reasonably be present, e.g. string, paper, nails, wire, wood, or evidence of contamination from rats and mice. Such materials can come from contamination in storage, or could have been picked up during combining. All of the above examples of impurities, and more, have been found in wheat, and a test has been developed for use in laboratories. It is a simple sieving test based on using two slotted screens with holes of different sizes. A sample of wheat is placed on the top deck and the apparatus is shaken either mechanically or manually. All impurities larger than wheat are retained on the top deck (3.5 mm), the wheat itself is retained on the middle deck, and any fine impurities pass through to the bottom container. These fine impurities can be further inspected for signs of infestation before being weighed together with the coarse impurities to give a total figure which is expressed as a percentage of the original wheat sample. If this figure exceeds the specification agreed with the wheat merchant, then the wheat can be rejected. High levels of screenings will contribute to poor extraction rates, black specks in the flour (especially wholemeals) and possibly taints. In relatively small amounts they will not be a problem, and should all be removed when the wheat is cleaned in the part of the mill known as the screenroom. {{page:300}} Wheat density. This property is commonly referred to as hectolitre weight or bushel weight. Various manufacturers produce equipment for its measurement and the most common apparatus all work in a similar manner. A cylinder of known volume is filled using a standard method and weighed. The figure obtained is converted to kilograms per hectolitre (kg/hl) and is one of the first tests carried out to determine the 'quality' of the grain. Hard breadmaking wheats will have a higher figure, in excess of 80 kg/hl, compared with softer biscuit types at around 70 kg/hl. A poor harvest will give low hectolitre weights because of the presence of small shrivelled and sprouted grains. The milling industry around the world has to maintain the optimum amount of flour from the wheat, which is referred to as the 'extraction rate'. Low hectolitre weights will give a poor extraction rate, can cause too many wheat grains to be removed in the screenroom, will produce a dirty 'specky' flour and are associated with low Hagberg Falling Number wheats. Having assessed the whole grain, and assuming the wheat has passed these initial tests, a sample of the wheat can be ground in a laboratory mill and a set of further tests carried out. Gluten content. For this test a sample of flour is prepared from the ground wheat by sieving. The gluten quality is tested using a small mixing machine which kneads the dough for a set time, before washing the starch away. A salt solution is used to help keep the gluten firm (CCFRA FTP 0013, 1991). The gluten sample can then be weighed and manually assessed for its vitality and strength. Alternatively a small dough can be prepared manually in a beaker and the starch washed away under a running tap. Wheat which has been dried incorrectly may have damaged protein so that its gluten will appear as very short and 'bitty' in character and in extreme cases the sample may not even form a gluten. Generally a smooth gluten with a good light grey colour indicates a good breadmaking wheat. Hagberg Falling Number. This is a measure of the cereal alpha-amylase in wheat, and is a critical parameter for large scale bakeries (Chapter 3). To carry out the measurement a suspension of flour from the laboratory grinder and water is blended in a test tube then heated in a boiling water bath and stirred continually for 60 s. At the end of this period the stirrer is brought to the top of the tube and released. The alpha-amylase in the sample slowly breaks the solution down converting the starch to dextrins, and the stirrer gradually sinks under its own weight. When the stirrer reaches the bottom of the tube the test is stopped. The resulting time in seconds is the Hagberg Falling Number, and is proportional to the amount of cereal alpha-amylase present, the higher the figure the lower the amylase (CCFRA FTP 0006, 1991). The Hagberg figure includes the first 60 s mixing, so 60 would be the lowest figure possible. Figures over 350 s are unreliable because the contents of the test tube will be at the same temperature as the water bath, and the amylase will have been denatured. This would normally happen at temperatures above 75°C (167°F). {{page:301}} FLOUR MILLING Moisture. The moisture content of wheat is important to both farmer and miller because wheat has to be stored for up to 12 months before use and therefore has to be low enough to prevent spoilage. As a general rule it should not exceed 15%, but if the miller intends using the wheat reasonably quickly then slightly higher figures might be accepted. There are several ways to determine moisture content in the wheat laboratory. NIR is often used and also heat balances. In the latter case, an infrared or incandescent heat source is mounted over an electronic balance and the sample is heated until a constant weight is achieved. Conductive methods are also available but the key factors are that they have to be quick and accurate. Oven drying methods, such as 4 h for 130'C for 1.5 h (BHSI, 1987) take far to much time for them to be used at wheat intake but are standards against which the rapid methods are calibrated. Protein content. Generally, the value for wheat protein content is accepted as nitrogen x 5.7. The classic method using the Kjeldahl apparatus (CCFRA FTP 0009, 1991) is far too long for use at the point of wheat intake. More rapid methods for protein determination have been developed, the most common one being based on near-infrared (NIR) (CCFRA FTP 0014, 1991) which can produce a result in approximately 25 s. Protein content and quality are of vital importance in flour milling. They are the characters which make wheat unique and are the main factor on which wheat is traded, with higher protein wheats commanding a higher value. Protein contents can vary widely from one lorry load to another and so accurate measurements are required to be able to segregate the wheat into suitable protein bands which can then be blended to give consistent grist formulations. The effects on protein of product character will be discussed further when flour testing methods are considered. Hardness. This is a measure of the wheat endosperm texture. As a general rule hard wheats are used in breadmaking and soft wheats are used for biscuits and cakes. However, this simple classification cannot be relied upon as there are many hard wheats that do not make bread and could only be described as 'feed' wheat, and there are also some so-called breadmaking wheat varieties that can be classified as soft. Wheat hardness testing can be carried out using a specially calibrated laboratory mill (Hook, 1982), where the time taken to grind a standard volume of material is measured. Alternatively, NIR can again be used (AACC Method 3970A, 1995) and has the advantage of reducing the number of tests carried out by the laboratory technician and therefore speeding up the whole of the sample testing process. Electrophoresis. This test is carried out to determine the specific variety of the wheat (BS 4317: Part 30, 1994). In essence the test splits the protein fraction {{page:302}} into individual amino acids and records them as a unique pattern which can then be used to compare an unknown pattern with those from known samples. Electrophoresis is not a usual test at the wheat intake; however, it is very valuable for ensuring authenticity when specific varieties are being purchased for specialized applications. Wheat storage All the laboratory tests must be carried out quickly while the lorry is at the mill, waiting to tip wheat. The results can then be assessed and a decision made as to whether the wheat meets the requirements of the specification laid down, and if so, into which bin it should be put. After the wheat has been tipped but before it reaches the storage bin, it will pass over some preliminary wheat-cleaning equipment consisting of coarse screens and magnets designed to remove the larger impurities in the wheat which may otherwise damage the mill equipment and possibly block the bins. The art of milling is to produce a consistent product from an inconsistent raw material. This is achieved through blending, and the process starts in the storage silos where wheat can be segregated into different types. These segregations depend on the type of flour being milled; obviously bread and biscuit types will be kept separate. They may also be segregated by variety or Hagberg Falling Number and they will often be separated into different protein bands. By segregating the delivered wheat in this way and then eventually blending it back at controlled levels, a more consistent finished product will be achieved. The quantity of storage space at the mill can vary widely and is dependent on many factors. In the UK, where mills are sited very near to the wheat-growing areas and road transport is good, mills need only have a very low storage capacity which could be as little as for 1 week's production. In some other countries storage on farms is very limited and the distances involved are much greater, so in these situations mills may contain many months' stocks of wheat. The care of wheat in storage will depend on the length of time it is expected to be there. If the mill has relatively small capacity and a high turnover of wheat there should be no need for any special care, so long as the grain is regularly monitored. However, if the grain is to be kept for long-term storage, then it should be regularly turned bottom to top to help blend it and prevent any hot spots from occurring from localized microbiological activity. The mill screenroom From the storage silos wheat will be drawn off and passed through the screenroom to be cleaned. This is a dry cleaning process and is designed to remove a wide range of impurities typically found in wheat. The equipment used relies on five basic principles to achieve this separation: {{page:303}} FLOUR MILLING • size; • specific gravity; • shape; • magnetism; • air resistance. Size. This is the most basic type of separation, in which the machine generally uses a double deck system, the top deck being a coarse screen which removes coarse impurities such as string, straw and paper, and allows the wheat and finer impurities to fall through to the second deck. This would be a finer screen allowing small impurities such as sand and dust to pass through, and to let the wheat overtail. However, any contaminants which are the same size as wheat will not be removed and require a different technique to take them out. Specific gravity. Some cleaning machines rely on the different densities of materials for separation of contaminants from wheat. The wheat will pass onto an inclined oscillating sieve bed and is fluidized by a controlled flow of air up through the sieve. Dense items such as stones fall through the screen onto a lower deck where as a result of the oscillations, they then travel up the deck and overtail into a container. To operate effectively, the machines require a delicate balance between the three variables, air flow, oscillation and angle of inclination. Shape. Machines that use this principle are commonly called cylinder or disc separators. They work in one of two ways. One type has discs with small pockets cut in them just the right size for small round seeds to fall in. As the discs rotate in the bulk of the wheat the seeds are lifted out and transferred to a separate conveyor. The second type of separating machines has pockets which are just big enough for wheat to fall in, and the wheat is lifted out leaving oats, barley and unthreshed grain behind. Usually these machines are used in tandem to remove both types of impurity. Magnetism. Plate magnets are situated at strategic points throughout the screenroom to collect any ferrous metal contamination. At this early stage in the process they are primarily used to protect the mill equipment, although their role in terms of product safety must not be overlooked. More recently, metal detectors have been appearing as part of the mill screenroom machinery. They have the added advantage of rejecting non-ferrous as well as ferrous materials. Air resistance (aspiration). Light impurities, such as dust and fine dirt, and those with a large surface area, such as chaff, lend themselves to being removed by a controlled flow of air. The wheat is spread into a wide curtain to expose the maximum surface area and air is drawn through it. Aspiration machines are used in several places throughout the screenroom, as the actual handling of the grain creates more dust which needs to be controlled and removed. {{page:304}} Conditioning The final process which takes place in the screenroom is conditioning of the wheat. Water may be added to the grain to a predetermined level and then left to stand for up to 24 h. The amount of water used, and the standing time vary according to the type of wheat. For example, Canadian wheat will be damped to between 16 and 17% moisture and left for a minimum of 12 h, while a soft English biscuit wheat would only be damped to about 15% for only 4-7 h. Conditioning is a critical stage in the milling process. Modem damping systems are fully automated, with moisture levels being continually monitored to maintain a constant level of water addition. The purpose of the conditioning is to aid the removal of the bran layers from the endosperm. By keeping the bran layers damp they will detach more easily and stay in larger pieces which aids their removal from the endosperm through the rest of the milling machinery. Badly conditioned wheat will mean that the bran layers will break up into small pieces which are difficult to remove and give the resulting flour a specky appearance and contribute to an increase in grade colour figure or ash content, and possibly a lower extraction rate. The moisture levels used during conditioning, especially for the harder wheats, are not maintained through to the finished flour where high flour moisture content would cause rapid deterioration. During the conditioning process a moisture gradient is developed within the cross-section of individual grains, high on the outside and lower in the centre. The removal of the bran, together with the heat generated within the milling process, brings the moisture of a typical white flour back within the range of 14-14.5%. After being fully cleaned and conditioned, the wheat is now ready for the milling operation itself. The mill From the early days of the twentieth century, flour milling has developed into a complex network of machines all doing a very specific job; however, the basic principle of the process has changed very little. In essence the wheat is ground between pairs of cast-iron rolls, and separated on a sieve into various sizes and quality fractions which are then ground again. This section will try to explain the various processes involved and their effects on final product performance. New mills are built using the latest technologies and engineering ideas and then evolve through their life with new techniques and products, so it must be remembered that there is no such thing as a standard flour mill. What we will try to do is describe a typical mill even though no such animal exists! The modem flour milling process can be separated into six very distinct areas (Figure 12.2); 1. the break system - the first grinding stages; 2. scalping, grading, dusting - the separation after each of the break rolls; 3. the scratch system - the final removal of bran from the system, although sizing systems are more commonly used in modem plants; {{page:305}} FLOUR MILLING 4. purifiers - the cleaning up of semolina stocks by grading and aspiration; 5. the reduction system - the reduction of semolina to flour; 6. flour dressing - the separation of flour from the other materials. The flour finally produced for the baker does not necessarily pass through every one of these stages. After each section some flour is created and will be removed, leaving the remaining stocks to continue through for further processing. Break system The rolls which go to make the break system are the first of the grinding operations, and consist of a series three to five, but usually four pairs of fluted rolls designed to break the grain open and extract as much of the endosperm as possible for the production of white flour. At this stage the endosperm will be in the form of coarse particles known as semolina, and must be separated from the individual grains with a minimum amount of disintegration of the bran. This is achieved by a combination of the flutes of the roll surfaces, which are cut on a slight spiral, and a speed differential between the rolls of the order of 2: 1, which apply a scissors-type action to the wheat. The designs of the flutes have been determined by experience, and get finer as the intermediate products pass from the first break rolls to the fourth. After each set of rolls the products pass to a sifter for separation into a series of sub-fractions before going on to the next part BREAK ROLLS SCALPING GRAD diNG an DUSTING PURIFIERS I: SCRATCH . SYSTEM REDUCTION ROLLS FLOUR DRESSERS Figure 12.2 Schematic of a flour milling process. {{page:306}} of the process. Even at this early stage in the mill process some flour will be produced, either released from along fracture lines of the endosperm or due to attrition of the different particles. This will be sieved out and bypass the rest of the process. At this stage the amounts will be small since it is not the aim of the break system to produce finished flour. Scratch system and bran finishers These are more finely fluted rolls than in the break system and are found in some mills. They are designed to remove the last fragments of endosperm from the smallest bran fragments. Stocks are usually transferred to the 'scratch' system from the purifiers where these bran-rich materials have been separated out. In some mills special bran finishers are installed after the third, fourth or even fifth break roll to 'dust off the last remaining flour from these bran stocks. This scratch system helps to increase the extraction rate, but the flours produced are of a low grade and have poor functionality in breadmaking. A variation of the scratch system is called the 'sizing' system. This is predominantly used in more modem mills where throughputs are higher, causing large variations in the feed to the first part of the reduction rolls. To even this out the normal coarse semolina from the first and second breaks are fed through a finely fluted sizing roll. This process gauges the semolina to a more uniform particle size and also flattens the germ allowing it to be sieved out. Scalping, grading and dusting These are the terms used to describe the separation of the stocks after each of the break rolls, and which take place inside multi-sectioned oscillating sieves. Scalping is the separation of the coarse overtails, generally bran fragments with some endosperm attached, which can then be passed on to the next reduction roll in the system. Throughs of the scalping sieve can be divided into coarse and fine semolina in a process known as grading. These fractions will pass straight to the purification system, while the flour that has been produced will be removed and transferred to the flour collection system. Bran and the majority of the wheatfeed will be removed from the system after the final break roll sifters. Purifiers The main aim of the purifiers is to clean or 'purify' the semolina stocks produced from the break sifters. Typically, a purifier is a long oscillating sievebed, mounted at an incline above various receiving hoppers. Air is drawn up through the stocks being sieved which, together with the reciprocating action, stratifies the stocks and lifts out any fine bran present. The air flow can vary as the products pass down the length of the machine, leaving the purified product to fall into the hoppers beneath them to make their way into the reduction {{page:307}} FLOUR MILLING system. A well-set purifier is important in supplying cleaned semolina to the reduction system in order to improve the efficiency of the latter. White flour with bran specks will produce unattractive bakery products and have a lower protein quality resulting in a reduced flour performance in breadmaking. Reduction system This is the final grinding stage in the flour production process. The cleaned semolina stocks are reduced down to the finished flour by a series of up to 12 pairs of roller mills. Reduction rolls are differentiated from the break rolls by being smooth rather than fluted and by having a reduced speed differential between individual rolls in the pairs. The first section of reduction rolls will generally be dealing with the cleaner semolina stocks, mostly from the first and second break sifters, and will therefore be producing the whitest flours with the best functionality for breadmaking. The middle section deals with the tailings from the first section and also the poorer quality stocks from the later break purifiers. The final two or three rolls deal with the stocks overtailing the first two sections, and will be producing lower quality flours. The set-up and performance of the reduction system in a flour mill has a significant effect on one of the most important parameters for breadmaking, namely the water absorption. There are three main factors in a flour specification which can have a direct effect on the water absorption: • moisture content; • protein content; • level of starch damage. These three factors, together with the pentosan content of the flour, enable the water absorption to be calculated very accurately. Given that the protein and moisture are predetermined by the specification and that the pentosan content is not a normal flour test, the major influence on water absorption is therefore the starch damage. In the milling process, damage to the starch granules present in the flour is achieved by grinding the flour on the reduction system which physically disrupts the starch grains and allows access to more sites on the starch chains for the water to bond. Grinding hard can also have an effect on the particle size of flour. Some flours, specifically those used for dusting, need to be coarse and free flowing so that they do not clump and block the feeders. By reducing the degree of grinding, the mill can produce a flour which meets these particular requirements. Flour dressing As in the break system, each pair of reduction rolls is followed by a sifter making between three and five separations. Flour is removed and the remaining {{page:308}} stocks are graded between the reduction rolls which follow. Towards the end of the system the flour removed is of poorer baking quality. The overtails pass out of the system into the wheatfeed bin. The operation of this sifting system is critical to maintaining the efficiency of the flour mill and can be hindered by the action of the reduction rolls on the semolina stocks. As mentioned earlier, the reduction rolls are running at similar speeds, and so have a tendency to flatten the semolina particles and produce small flakes. If the flakes are passed to the sifters, the sieving action would be very inefficient and too much material would overtail the system. To prevent this happening, flake disrupters are installed above most reduction rolls. These machines are made up of two metal discs, held apart by short pins, mounted inside a case and driven by a high-speed motor at approximately 3000 rpm. Flour stocks pass into the centre of the discs and are thrown outwards through the pins by the centrifugal force, breaking up any flakes on their way through. At the end of the flour dressing process all the flours from the various machines are brought together and blended to produce what is referred to as a 'straight run' flour. This is the normal white flour supplied to the majority of customers, and accounts for between 76 and 78% of the initial wheat. This figure is referred to as the 'extraction rate' and is an indication of the mill efficiency. If required by the customer, the miller can be more selective with the streams of flour being produced and make a 'patent' flour. This will use only the high-grade streams with the whiter colour, generally from the first section of the reduction system. In this case the flour protein will be slightly lower due to the protein gradient in the wheat grain, i.e. the outer layers have a higher protein content, but the quality is not quite as good. A patent flour would have an extraction rate of approximately 60% and would therefore be more costly for the baker. The dark flour not used in the manufacture of a patent flour is referred to as 'low-grade'. While not suitable for normal bakery use, there are certain products where low-grade flours have a distinct advantage if they are available. These would include malt breads, speciality rye breads, and some types of boiled pie paste where the poor colour can actually be used to an advantage. At the end of the milling process there will be a range of different products: • straight run white flour (or patent and low-grade flours); • coarse and fine wheat brans for use as an ingredient in many bakery products, health foods and breakfast cereals; • wheatfeed used as an animal feed and containing the finest brans and possibly the wheatgerm, and low-grade flours if these cannot be sold separately. Brown flours would be blends of bran and straight run flour and will have an extraction rate of about 90%, while wholemeals (wholewheats) must be made from 100% of the wheat. {{page:309}} FLOUR MILLING Storage and packing From the mill, flour will pass through a final redresser before bulk storage. The final redresser will be a fine sieve of about 300 f.IIll mesh. The sieve here is used as a precaution should one of the many other sieves in the mill burst. The overtails will be monitored on a regular basis to check for this particular problem. Bulk storage bins can be made from either wood, concrete or steel, depending on a balance between personal preference, materials available, product safety and price. Early bins were made of wood, which at the time was a good material and offered a degree of insulation which helped prevent condensation. Concrete can be used but such bins are liable to crack, are very heavy and require deep foundations. Both these materials have the disadvantage that pieces can break off and contaminate the flour, which helps to confirm steel bins as the most popular choice for modern flour mills. These are cheaper, do not crack like concrete, are lighter and easier to install, and if required can be dismantled and resited. Bin cross-sections may be either square or round. Round bins are stronger but take up more space. Square bins need corrugated sides to give added strength, but have the advantage that there is no dead space between adjoining bins where infestation can build up. From bulk storage the flour is transferred for either bulk delivery or packing. It is always good practice, from any form of storage, to pass the flour through a redresser to check that the flour has not been contaminated with any foreign material or hard lumps of flour. Packing covers a range of sizes depending on final usage, from I kg for domestic use up to I tonne tote bags for medium-sized bakeries. Flour used to be delivered in hessian bags which were returned to the miller; however, they were a serious infestation risk and these bags have now been generally replaced with paper sacks. Bulk tankers can make deliveries from 5 tonnes to a maximum defined by local lorry weight regulations. The smaller deliveries require specialized tankers which either have compartments for different flours or have one flour that can be metered accurately to different customers. These smaller bulk deliveries do not offer the same advantages in terms of cost benefit as those derived from a full tanker delivery, although they do significantly reduce the amount of packaging to be disposed of by the baker. Food safety and product protection The consumer's requirement for increasing confidence in safety and wholesomeness of the food that they eat has over the years worked its way through the supply chain from the multiple supermarkets, through to the food manufacturer, and then to the primary ingredient suppliers. The growers are now also understanding that they have a role to play in food safety, and the dialogue between the miller and farmer, which at one time was only about price, is now becoming more intense on more serious food safety issues. {{page:310}} To succeed in any business you have to supply your customers with what they want. If you do not then someone else will. Flour milling is obviously no different and has had to respond by improving product safety measures. Millers have had to change their culture from being what could be described as an extension of the agricultural industry to being a food factory in their own right. Customer concerns about possible contaminants can be allayed by applying Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) principles to flour milling. Contaminants in flour can be broken down into three basic categories: • foreign bodies; • chemical; • biological. Foreign bodies These are probably the most common problem with flour, but potentially the easiest to deal with. Typical contaminants would be those associated with the milling process and include pieces of hardened flour from blowlines and bins, sifter wire or nylon, pieces from sieve cleaners and cotton fibres. The benefit of the flour mill is that it has a collection of sieves at strategic points throughout the process. Some of these are process sieves to separate the different stocks within the mill. However, others referred to earlier, such as the final redresser, the last one in the milling process, and the redressers after bulk storage, are critical for monitoring and ensuring the safety of the finished product. Overtails of these sieves can be checked at relevant times, and the findings recorded. While small amounts of bran and hardened flour will always be found, if the level suddenly increases from the norm, this should be taken as an indication that a problem has occurred and that corrective action is needed. Likewise if any unusual object is found its source must be investigated to prevent any further problem. It must never be assumed that 'the sieve is doing its job by removing the object'. The redressers are there to indicate problems in the process, and any unusual findings should therefore prompt a response. The same principles should be applied to metal detectors and magnets. Magnets have been used in flour milling for many years, but for more selfish reasons than protecting the customer. They were initially used to protect milling equipment from damage or from being blocked. Their use has now been extended to cover product protection but they are obviously limited to just ferrous metals. Their value in terms of product protection has also been limited by the higher volumes of product passing over them in the newer high-speed mills. Any ferrous contaminant can be 'blown off' by the force of the flour; even the higher strength rare earth magnets are not foolproof. In terms of product protection for metal contaminants, the way forward is obviously the metal detector. Capable of reacting to ferrous and non-ferrous metals down to I mm in size, their positive action removes the object from the flour stream. They need to be situated as late as possible in the product flow and their action needs to be regularly {{page:311}} FLOUR MILLING checked to ensure that they not only see the contamination, but that they also reject it into a suitable container. This is usually done by introducing a 'test piece' into the product flow and recovering it from the reject bag. Chemical contaminants There are two main areas of concern under this heading: pesticide residues and taints. Reacting to consumer demand for cheaper foods, modem intensive farming relies to a significant extent on the chemical control of weeds and insects to maximize the yield from the growing crops. However, more recent concerns about the effect of these chemicals on the environment has resulted in tight controls being used to minimize their use. All chemicals used on agricultural products are regulated by various laws, e.g. EU and CODEX, which define their maximum residue limits (MRLs). It is the farmer's responsibility to ensure that these levels are not exceeded; however, millers must police relevant agricultural practices by setting up regular checks to confirm the safety of the ingredients they are using. In the UK a 'Pesticide Passport System' has recently been introduced to record what type and level of pesticides has been used on a particular load of wheat. Taints are far more difficult to track down. The very nature of flour lends itself to absorbing taints, and as a general precaution it should never be stored near strong-smelling ingredients, such as spices. Strong cleaning chemicals and scented soaps should not be allowed in the mill, and again regular checks of the incoming raw material and outgoing products should be carried out. It must never be assumed that the technicians carrying out these tasks either know what they are looking for, or can actually detect the taint at all. Phenolic taints for example often described as 'earthy' or 'musty' can be detected at very low levels by susceptible individuals, while others cannot detect them at all. It is always worthwhile investing in specialized training for the people who are going to carry out these tasks. Biological contaminants This is a general heading to cover both microbiological contamination, e.g. Salmonella and E. coli, and product infestation. The microbiology of wheat flour cannot be controlled to any significant degree by the normal processes of flour milling. The operation starts with a raw agricultural material, wheat, which is successively ground and sieved to produce a flour. Therefore, from an HACCP point of view, flour should always be treated by food producers as microbiologically dirty and should not be eaten raw or come into contact with finished bakery products. In many situations this is not a problem because most food products containing flour are baked before consumption. There are one or two examples of flour confectionery where this is not the case, and in these situations heat-treated flour or flour from steam-treated wheat can be used. However, {{page:312}} all forms of heat treatment denature the gluten and this makes it unacceptable for the production of fermented products and pastries. What the miller can do is produce his flour using good manufacturing practice (GMP) to reduce any risks of contamination. By developing cleaning schedules for all areas, especially high-risk areas such as damping and conditioning equipment, any possible cross-contamination can be significantly reduced. Another area of concern which has more recently become apparent is the potential presence of mycotoxins such as aflatoxin and ochratoxin from specific toxigenic fungi. It is well documented that most foods are prone to fungal growth at some stage during production, processing and storage (Frisvad and Samson, 1992). These fungi may well be killed or removed during processing; however, the toxins which have been produced will remain in the final product. The only form of control is to avoid using the conditions under which the moulds concerned will flourish. With levels as low as 4 ppb being quoted in specifications and proposed in some legislation (EC/315/93) there is very little room for error, and with very limited historical information, this is going to be an area that will tax the miller and farmer in the future. Infestation, on the other hand, is a problem with which the miller is well acquainted and has been since time began. It is not an area that the miller of 100 years ago worried about and you can still hear in some parts of the world the less professional miller using phrases like 'it's a flour mill, you expect to see flour beetles'. However, as we have already said, today's customers demand more in terms of quality and safety. Control of infestation within the mill takes several forms. Inspection of the raw material at intake can prevent infestation entering the building, and cleaning schedules and regular hygiene inspections can prevent the build-up of material which could form the nucleus for any infestation outbreak. Spot spraying of any problem areas can help keep the problem under control. Annual fumigation with methyl bromide is still a regular procedure in many parts of the world. Used in the late spring when insect activity is just beginning to build up, it helps control deep-seated activity which would be difficult to eliminate by other methods. It has, however, been confirmed as an ozonedepleter and the effect of the Montreal Protocol (1993) means that an alternative will have to be found by the year 2000. Several options are still being considered, the application of heat (Dosland, 1995) being one of them, but they are more expensive and lack the penetrating effect of methyl bromide. There is also a piece of equipment in the mill that is sometimes referred to as an 'infestation destroyer'. The in-line flake disrupters used after the reduction rolls have the effect of breaking up any insects and their eggs. However, these cannot be relied on as they leave the insect fragments in the flour, and this itself can cause customers problems, especially in parts of the world where the filth test (AOAC, 1990), the number of rodent hairs and insect fragments in a sample of flour is being used as a quality standard. With white flours having a shelf life of 12 months, it is important that millers do all in their power to prevent contamination of their product. {{page:313}} FLOUR MILLING Recent developments in flour milling Flour milling has changed little since the transition from stone to metal roller mills. Milling systems have become more refined, controls have become improved and milling speeds have increased. Mill engineers have searched for alternatives that would in some way improve the finished product, or at least improve mill efficiencies and reduce manufacturing costs, but the refinements that have occurred show that it is very difficult to improve on the basic flour milling process. One technique that is currently being proposed is that of 'pearling' the wheat to remove the majority of the bran layers, similar to the process used for rice. This process does not require the classic conditioning stage, instead the bran layers are carefully removed in a two-stage machine abrasive process followed by interparticle friction (Satake, 1990). Bran removal is very tightly controlled to suit the ash content of the finished product. The endosperm is not disrupted during the process, so the problem of separating bran powder from the flour does not exist to the same degree as it does in the standard flour milling process. The pearling stage is closely followed by a 'hydrating' section used to control the level of moisture in the finished flour. The hydration time is significantly reduced to between 30 min and 2 h, and is only necessary to replace moisture loss during the milling process. This shorter time means that this new process can quickly respond to the moisture content of the finished flour, and a control loop can be set up to maintain the level far more accurately than with current conditioning systems. Controlling flour quality and specification Let us start by defining quality. We often hear phrases like 'top quality' and when there is a problem 'poor quality'. Quality should never be defined from the manufacturer's perspective, it should always be defined by the customer and what they want. In many ways we can simply define 'quality' as being 'fitness for purpose' - the flour has to do what the customer wants it to do! Quality is also 'consistency' - it is no good delivering a flour to a customer and saying 'it's better than last week's'. Flour is invariably the major raw material in bread and fermented goods and needs to be of the same quality all of the time, so that the bakers can, in tum, achieve high manufacturing efficiencies and provide their customers with a product of consistent quality. The problem for millers is that flour is used in a wide variety of applications from bakery to explosives and from foundries to face powder, and they have to find a way of controlling quality for each and everyone of them, even though the basic raw material is variable. This is achieved using two main techniques: {{page:314}} • by blending either the wheat, the flour, or both; • by the addition of selected additives. Gristing versus blending The start of the quality process is the blending of wheats or the recipe known to the miller as the 'wheat grist'. Based on the type of flour required and its specification, the miller will decide which wheats should be used in the grist. At intake the individual wheats parcels will have been segregated into a number of different types, such as biscuit, bread, high protein or low protein. The grist for a particular flour will have been predetermined by a variety of methods, but generally it will be based on the miller's experience of the character of different wheats and a knowledge of the customer's process (some customers have sufficient knowledge to determine the milling grist for themselves). Some grists may contain high protein wheats, such as Canadian Western Red Springs (CWRS), German or Australian. For bread flour the grist will be blended to a consistent protein level that will be up to 0.7% higher than that of the finished flour. This higher-protein specification allows for the protein drop between wheat and flour due to the higher levels of protein in the brans layers than in the endosperm. Where possible, the wheat protein can be gristed to a lower level to allow for the addition of dried vital wheat gluten. This material is very useful especially in seasons when wheat proteins are low because it can help maintain the flour protein at the required level (Chamberlain, 1984). Another advantage of dried gluten is that with the ability to monitor protein continuously on-line using near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy, a control loop can be set up to feed in the dried gluten thereby giving very tight control of protein levels (Maris et al., 1990). A problem with the use of dried gluten is that it does affect the hydration time of the flour and the rheological properties of the dough. Depending on the amount used, doughs can continue to hydrate after mixing, giving a tighter dough than is required, which causes problems including poor moulding. The gluten in the mixed dough will also appear more elastic and tougher, but this may help maintain the shape of oven-bottom breads. Some customers will consider the use of gluten an unnecessary ingredient in bread flour, and this was probably caused by high usage levels during the 1970s before its potential was fully understood. It is, however, a very useful ingredient, especially at a time when customers are requesting fewer and fewer 'additives' but it must be used at a consistent level- as mentioned earlier, the customer demands consistency. The protein content of bread flours can vary widely according to the type of bread being manufactured and the breadmaking method being used. Typically, at the lower end of the range would be French flours for baguette at around 9.5% (as is) using selected French baguette wheats, rising up through 10.5% for CBP sandwich-type loaves, up to 11.5 to 12% for general-purpose bakers' flours and, finally, 12.5% and above for competition and speciality breads (Chapter 2). Once the grist is running through the mill, the miller can affect characteristics {{page:315}} FLOUR MILLING such as flour water absorption by adjusting the amount of starch damage caused on the reduction system, and flour colour by the amount of tail-end (low-grade, high ash) flours allowed into the final blend. Patent flours, i.e. flours with an exceptionally white colour, are particularly good for breadmaking. They give a good clean crumb colour and, although their protein content might be slightly lower than a normal straight run flour, their quality and baking performance are far superior. Unfortunately, the cost of these flours generally makes them commercially unattractive. Blending wheats prior to milling is a very popular way of producing flours but it does have some disadvantages. Each wheat in a grist will have its own peculiar characteristics, depending on its variety or source, for example grain size, shape, hardness, moisture content, protein quantity and quality. They can all affect the way the grain behaves through the mill, so that if the grains are blended before milling, the mill settings will have to be a compromise between the various milling characteristics. However, if the wheats are milled individually, for example by variety or type, and then the flours produced are blended, one can be more accurate with the settings of the roller mills and the purifiers, and so maximize the quality from each wheat. Each individual flour milled can then be fully analysed before blending is carried out, with the result that a more consistent flour is produced. The blending process can be as sophisticated or as simple as required. In its most basic form the flours can be metered together volumetrically using variable-speed discharges on the bottom of the bins. With more sophisticated batch blending using ribbon-type or similar mixers, the flour would be weighed into the mixer along with any other additions. A flour blending system, while more expensive, gives better control of finished products and more accurate application of any additives. Additives Additives are the final tool available to millers to help them improve the performance and consistency of their products. Over recent years the number of additives used have been slowly declining in part because of safety concerns about the use of chemicals in food. Potassium bromate and benzoyl peroxide have now gone from the permitted list of additives for breadmaking in the UK (Potassium Bromate Regulations, 1990; Bread and Flour Regulations UK, 1995) and although chlorine dioxide is still acceptable from a regulatory point of view, customer pressure has meant that there are very few flours in the UK where it is used today. In practice millers are only left with ascorbic acid and various enzymes as methods of controlling the performance of their flours (Chapter 3). Other nutritional additions may be made to meet with legislative requirements for nutrition in various countries (e.g. Bread and Flour Regulations UK, 1995) or to meet the supply requirements for a particular market sector. {{page:316}} Ascorbic acid It has been known for almost 60 years that ascorbic acid, chemically a reducing agent, can be used as an oxidizing bread improver (Melville and Shattock, 1938). During mixing the atmospheric oxygen converts the ascorbic acid to dehydroascorbic acid, which is the oxidizing agent. Since the removal of potassium bromate in 1990, ascorbic acid has become the major additive for modifying flour performance in the UK and elsewhere. Its effect on the gluten is to reduce extensibility and increase elasticity, giving better shape and finer texture to the finished breads. It is added at low levels by flour millers to provide improved flour performance in those breadmaking situations where a separate improver addition will not be made in the bakery. If a separate improver addition is being made then the additional contribution from the flour is too low to have a major effect on bread quality. Enzymes The addition of enzyme-active materials to breadmaking flours is now generally considered to be the way forward for flour modification. Their use is described in more detail in other chapters. Enzyme-active materials have always been used by bakers to improve performance. There are generally three types of enzymes used by the miller to supplement flour: • amylases which act on starch (amylose and amylopectin); • proteases which act on proteins; • hemicellulases which act on hemicellulose (also called pentosans). Amylases. One of the most common techniques used by bakers not that many years ago would be to include a small amount of malt flour in a bread mix. This would have contained large amounts of cereal alpha-amylase which would break the damaged starch down to dextrins, which in tum would be broken down by the beta-amylases into maltose, a useful yeast food. Malt flour was also used by the miller to improve flour performance, especially in years when the Hagberg Falling Number was particularly high. However, it was known that at excessive levels, bread crumb becomes sticky and difficult to slice. This is caused by the beta-amylase being deactivated much earlier in the baking process than the alpha-amylase, which continues working until approximately 75°C (l67°F) and produces an excess of sticky dextrins (Chamberlain et ai., 1977). In the early 1970s fungal amylases were introduced, which were a much more controlled ingredient and had the added benefit that they are deactivated earlier in the baking process (Chapter 3). This meant they could be used at much higher levels without the stickiness problem, with additional benefits including a finer, whiter texture, better volume and an apparent improvement in the shelf life of the bread (Cauvain and Chamberlain, 1988). {{page:317}} FLOUR MILLING Protease. The group of enzymes included under this heading are generally used where large quantities of hard wheats are included in the milling grist, e.g. North American. They help to reduce the strength of the dough and so improve handling and product texture, but they must be used with discretion to avoid a complete breakdown of the dough structure. A more common use of proteases would be in the production of biscuits and wafers where weaker proteins are more desirable and yet some degree of protein functionality is still required (Wade, 1995). Hemicellulases. The use of hemicellulases in breadmaking is a more recent introduction, only being allowed in the UK since 1996 (Bread and Flour Regulations UK, 1995). They break down in a controlled manner the pentosan component of the hemicellulose. This action continues through the mixing, fermentation and early baking stages, giving a soft but not sticky dough and which yields bread with improved volume and texture. They are useful in all flours, but of particular benefit in flours which contain high percentages of hemicellulose, such as brown, wholemeal (wholewheat) and rye flours and meals. Nutritional additions Bread has always been seen as a fundamental food, and as such has been well regulated to prevent adulteration and to protect the consumer. Fortification of the flour because of its role as a major ingredient was seen as a method of ensuring that the population as a whole were receiving the extra minerals and vitamins that might be lacking in some diets. Since the 1940s all flours in the UK, with the exception of wholemeal, have contained the following: • calcium carbonate to provide calcium ions; • a source of iron; • thiamine; • nicotinic acid. Even the latest amendment of the UK Bread and Flour Regulations (1995) has retained this type of fortification even though diets in the UK are generally much improved. So rather than a reduction in nutritional additives, the future may actually bring an increase with a move towards what are termed 'functional foods', i.e. foods which can make a positive contribution to health through their consumption. As an example, folic acid, which helps prevent neural tube defects in unborn children (Alldrick, 1993, 1994), is already appearing in certain breads thereby offering consumers an element of choice. It is unlikely, however, that with a general move towards deregulation in the EU, that any further nutritional additive will be required by legislation in the future. {{page:318}} Other flour types So far this chapter has discussed wheat flour from the perspective of white flour, since this accounts for approximately 90% of all flour used. Other flour types are available the following are just a few examples. Brown If white flour has an extraction rate in the range 76-78%, then brown flours have the equivalent of about 85-90%. They can be produced during the milling process by feeding back 10-15% of selected bran stocks into a white flour, or in a mixing plant by blending wholemeal and white flours in the ratio 50:50. Wholemeal (wholewheat) As the name suggests, this is the product of the whole grain. They can be produced on a standard roller mill, but they are perceived to be of better quality if made on a stone-ground plant. While I have seen several explanations as to why this is the case, I have not been convinced by them, and continue to believe that the only difference between stone-ground and roller-ground wholemeal is sand! Both brown and wholemeal flours tend to have higher protein contents than white flours. Values up to 14.0% protein, with the flours often supplemented by dried gluten, are not uncommon because the dough has to hold the bran, which is effectively a non-functional ingredient in breadmaking. The particle size of the bran is also important to obtain the best performance (Cauvain, 1987). Coarse bran can give a good visual effect both in the bread crumb and on the crust, but if there is too much coarse bran present in the flour it can result in an open and unattractive crumb structure. At the other end of the scale, fine bran can have a deadening effect on the bread, resulting in a bland, small loaf with a dull grey crumb. The answer, as always, is a balance between the two and will be defined by customer requirements. Self-raising flours A combination of sodium bicarbonate together with a suitable acid ingredient will produce a flour for a variety of uses, induding the manufacture of batters, cakes and scones. By varying the acid ingredient, the point in the process when the carbon dioxide is evolved can be varied. For example, if monocalcium phosphate is used then 60% of the carbon dioxide will be generated at the mixing stage and 40% during baking. If this ingredient is changed to sodium aluminium phosphate, then this can be changed to 30% at the mixing stage and 70% during baking. The requirement for heat to be applied before the majority of the carbon dioxide is liberated can be useful if the product is required to stand before baking or if an extended shelf life is required in the flour. {{page:319}} FLOUR MILLING Malted grain flours The addition of malted grains, either kibbled or flaked, together with additional malt flours, either diastatic or non-diastatic (or both), can produce a very attractive bread with exceptional flavour characteristics. Other types of flours available will include wheatgerm flour, soft grain flours, and flour blends containing other cereals, e.g. rye, oats and maize. Flour testing methods The miller has a range of tests available to determine values for what are considered to be the most important performance specifications for a particular flour. Of these the measurement of protein quality presents the greatest challenge with different pieces of equipment being preferred in different countries. I have used the term 'protein quality', but having already defined quality earlier as 'fitness for purpose' we should perhaps therefore really refer to protein quality as 'protein rheology' because what is 'good quality' for one type of bread, may well be 'poor quality' for another. Protein and moisture content These are two of the most important parameters in flour, and are generally measured during production using an NIR analyser (CCFRA FTP 0014, 1991). This is by far the most common piece of testing equipment in flour mill laboratories and has already been mentioned under 'Wheat testing'. It is versatile and quick, conducting a range of tests, such as protein and moisture, but also starch damage, water absorption and even colour, in less than 30 s. However, with speed of measurement some accuracy is lost, and the NIR analyser is best kept for the main parameters of protein and moisture. To maintain their accuracy, the instruments must be calibrated at regular intervals by comparing with national, or ideally international, standard methods. For protein content this is normally the Kjeldahl acid digestion method using sulphuric acid in the presence of a catalyst (CCFRA FIP 0009, 1991). The nitrogen figure produced is then converted to a protein value using the Kjeldahl factors as follows: Wheat bran 6.31 Other wheat products 5.70 Other foods 6.25 The Kjeldahl method is not generally used during production because of the time it takes to provide a protein value, and because of the dangers arising from the strong reagents used. It is now rapidly being replaced by the Dumas method, a much safer system based on using combustion in the presence of oxygen {{page:320}} (AACC Method 46-30, 1995). It is as accurate as the Kjeldahl method, and much quicker; in fact it is fast enough to be used as a quality assurance test during the milling operation, but requires more skill to operate than the NIR analyser. In some countries, including the UK, all proteins are declared on an 'as is' basis, i.e. as a percentage of all the constituents including the moisture. While this has certain advantages, it relies on the moisture content always being the same, otherwise it could appear that the protein content is varying. For example, a flour measured at three different moisture contents would give the following results: Protein (%) On a dry matter basis (dmb) 10.0 9.3 The same flour with a moisture of 8% 8.7 The same flour with a moisture of 15% One should always check, when comparing flour specifications from different countries, that the protein content is quoted to the same moisture content. Moisture determination on the NIR analyser needs to be calibrated to an oven method, typically 130°C (266°F) for 90 min and 2 h for ground wheat (CCFRA FTP 0008, 1991). This test should be one of the simplest to carry out, but it can prove difficult to obtain consistent results especially when comparing results from different laboratories. This is not necessarily due to problems with the test method or the operatives; it is more likely that the pneumatic handling causes variations in the flour. Throughout the mill, during bulk delivery and also on customers' premises, flour is moved using either negative or positive air pressure. The air movement itself is sufficient to give a drying effect; however, when positive pressure is used, the increase in air temperature due to compression can enhance this effect. It is possible for flour to increase in temperature by up to 5°C (9°F) when blown from one bin to another. In this type of situation flour moisture can easily drop by half a percentage point, which is sufficient to cause disputes between millers and customers who carry out their own checks. Flour grade colour The flour grade colour (FGC) or sometimes grade colour figure (GCF) is measured using a Kent Jones Colour Grader (CCFRA FTP 000712, 1991). It is a measurement made of the reflection of light in the 530 nm wavelength region from the surface of a flour and water slurry contained in a glass cell. It gives a measure of bran contamination of white flours and varies with the amount of low-grade flours, from the tail end of the mill, which are allowed through to the final product. The measured value is also influenced by background endosperm colour which depends on the type of wheat in the grist, and the particular crop year, where the quality of the wheat can also influence the ultimate endosperm colour. Standardization is carried out using National Colour Standards (CCFRA FTP 0007/1, 1991), which ensure consistent results between laboratories, {{page:321}} FLOUR MILLING although there is an internal white tile which can be used on a day-to-day basis to prevent drift. Grade colour is not a measure of the visual appearance of the flour. Two samples of flour that can look completely different may give the same grade colour value. Over the years other methods have been considered to get round this problem and provide a figure that measures the actual appearance, but the colour grade figure is so well entrenched and understood by both millers and bakers in the UK and other countries that changing it would be like losing an old friend! Flour colour is closely associated with ash content which is used to measure flour purity in many parts of the world. Unfortunately, in countries such as the UK, where flour is fortified with minerals, the ash content appears unreasonably high and cannot be used as a direct measure of flour quality. Flour colour or ash content can affect the flour performance in baking; generally the whiter the flour, the better the breadmaking properties (Cauvain et ai., 1983, 1985). This fact is recognized in some countries, such as Italy, where the maximum ash content of soft wheat flours is defined in law. There are three main categories, defined on a dry solids basis: Flour type 00 = 0.50% Flour type 0 = 0.65% Flour type 1 = 0.80% 'Specky' flour, i.e. flour contaminated with very small but visible pieces of bran, is not readily picked up using the flour colour grader test, and in the past its detection has relied on a visual inspection by millers. Using the latest advances in image analysis, a new method to test the bran content of flour has recently been introduced. The 'Branscan', as it is called, is designed for on- or off-line use. A sample of flour is compressed against a transparent window and a video camera with a PC-based image analysis system is used to calculate the number of bran specks. In the laboratory this is carried out by a technician but in the on-line system the process is completely automatic with the results being displayed on a graph with both the number and total area covered by the bran (expressed as a percentage; Evers, 1993). This method is unaffected by variations in endosperm colour and composition, and can be set up to alarm when a specific figure has been exceeded. Water absorption Water absorption is a well-used term in flour technology, but unfortunately it will mean different things to different people. Bakers mixing batters will be adding more water to their products than when they make bread doughs, which in tum will be more than for biscuit doughs. Even within a particular product group, the recipe used will affect the amount of water added. Thus a water absorption test used has to eliminate these variations and deal with just flour and water; it cannot be complicated by a variety of products or ingredients. The {{page:322}} dough must also have a predefined, 'optimum' viscosity so that it can at least provide a value that is reproducible. The test which has become the standard uses the Brabender Farinograph (CCFRA FTP 0004, 1991). This machine measures and records the mixing characteristics of a dough made from just flour and water, and continues to record the properties as the dough develops to its maximum viscosity and until it starts to break down. The operator is required to add sufficient water to the flour to produce a dough with the maximum viscosity on the 600 line (this is the case for most breadmaking flours in the UK, although lower figures may be set on the Farinograph in other parts of the world). This may take two or three attempts, but once done, the machine is allowed to run to form the characteristic Farinograph curve. The water absorption is the amount of water added to the flour to achieve a given viscosity and is conveniently recorded in percentage terms directly on the burette. The Farinograph itself also gives valuable information on the rheology of the dough, as will be discussed later in this chapter. The water absorption of a flour is influenced by four parameters: • Moisture content. A flour with a moisture content of 13% will have an apparent water absorption which is 1 % higher than the same flour at 14%. • Protein content. Protein absorbs its own weight in water, so that a higherprotein flour will naturally absorb more water than a lower protein one. • Starch damage level. This is probably the major factor affecting the water absorption properties of flour. As discussed above, starch damage is achieved by grinding the flour hard on the reduction rolls. Excessive starch damage can cause a greying of the crumb colour and an opening of the crumb structure (Collins, 1985). • Pentosan (hemicellulose) level. These are present, at levels of 2-3% in white flours and up to 10% in wholemeal (wholewheat). These non-starch polysaccharides have a very high water-binding capacity and, although present in the dough at very low levels, can actually account for absorbing up to one-third of the water in the dough. The water absorption capacity of flours will typically vary from 50-54% for biscuit flours up to 60-62% for standard UK bread flours. Hagberg Falling Number As discussed under 'Wheat testing', this is a measure of the cereal alphaamylase content of the flour. It is important that it is controlled at the wheat stage because it cannot be affected by the milling process. It can be lowered by the addition of malt flours, but while investigations have been carried out, no technique has been found to reduce the amylase and so increase the Hagberg Falling Number. The blending of flours with different Hagberg Falling Numbers can also be problematic because a simple arithmetic mean will not give a satis- {{page:323}} FLOUR MILLING factory approximation. Instead the values have to be converted to a liquefaction number using the following formula: Liquefaction number (LN) = 6000/(Falling Number - 50) Rearranging the equation we can convert back from liquefaction number: Hagberg Falling Number = 6000 + 50ILN In the following example, two flours are blended 50:50; flour 1 has a Hagberg Falling number of 100 and flour 2 has a Hagberg Falling number of 300. LN = 6000/(100 - 50) = 6000/50 = 120 Flour 1 LN = 6000/(300 - 50) = 6000/250 = 24 Flour 2 The liquefaction number of the blended flour will be: LN (blended flour) = (120 x 50)/100 + (24 x 50)/100 = 60 + 12 = 72 The Hagberg Falling Number (HFN) will be: HFN = (6000172) + 72 = 83 + 50 = 133 The result is not the arithmetic mean of the two flours, which would have been 200 but is significantly biased towards the lower end. Flour rheology The rheological properties of flour are probably the most critical parameter in the whole of the flour specification. It is an indication of how a given dough will behave as it is being processed through the plant and through the oven and is related to the quality of the finished product. There are countless different bakery products and even more combinations of ingredients, and if you add to this the possible differences in the processing then you have an infinite combination that would be impossible to define individually in terms of flour parameters. I therefore have some sympathy with the view that if you want to know whether a flour will make a pizza, you have to make a pizza. For this reason, test bakeries in flour mills are very common. Whether they are used to determine the suitability of wheat varieties in specific applications, or just as a final test in the quality assurance process, they are invaluable in helping millers understand the final process and in giving their customers that extra bit of confidence. While loaves of bread can be measured for volume and assessed for colour and texture, the tests still carry an element of subjectivity as discussed in Chapter 1. More closely defined and more rapid tests than baking are required to help millers assess the suitability of their flours. The dough rheology assessment methods we use today, with all their imperfections, have stood the test of time and in some cases having been around for more than 50 years. While our scientific understanding of dough rheology has improved and breadmaking processes have changed, we still use three basic testing methods based on the Farinograph {{page:324}} (CCFRA FrP 0004, 1991), the Extensograph (CCFRA FrP 0003, 1991) and the Alveograph (Faridi and Rasper, 1987). Farinograph We have already mentioned the use of the Farinograph for measuring water absorption, but it is also very useful for measuring the mixing characteristics of flours and gives a good indication of flour performance in breadmaking. There are three pieces of information that can be deduced from a farinogram (Figure 12.3): • Dough development time (A). This is the time taken from the start of mixing to the point of maximum viscosity just before the curve starts to weaken. It will be longer with strong flours and very short with biscuit flours. • Stability (B). This property is measured from the point when the top of the graph first crosses the 600 line (or other fixed point), to the point where it drops below it, i.e. the time the curve is above the line. It gives a measure of the tolerance of the flour to mixing. • Degree of softening (C). This is the difference in height, measured in Brabender units, between the centre of the graph at the maximum viscosity, and the centre of the graph at a point 12 min later. Some examples of the different farinograms obtained with different flours are given in Figure 12.4. The Farinograph test is probably the most rapid of the three being discussed under this heading; water absorption can be done in 10-15 min, the full curve probably taking another 10-15 min, depending on the flour. Because of these short testing times it is possible to use the Farinograph as a quality assurance tool. This is not the case with the next test. :---A ". • I ZM/"I : 1-;S-' I I I I I I I J I I A Dough development time (min) B Dough stability (min) C Degree of softening (Brabender units) (Drop dfter 12 min from the peak) Figure 12.3 Typical farinogram . See text for key to symbols. {{page:325}} FLOUR MILLING Extensograph In this test a flour-salt-water dough is prepared under standard conditions using the Farinograph. The salt is used at 2% (6 g in 300 g of flour), which is a level typically seen in bread, as it has a tightening effect on the dough which helps give a more realistic result. Various attachments on the Extensograph are then used to mould the dough to a standard shape before resting. After a set time of 45 min the dough is stretched, and the extensibility of the dough and its resistance are recorded. Immediately the doughs are remoulded and allowed to stand for a further 45 min before being stretched once again. The dough pieces are once more remoulded, and rested a further 45 min before the final stretch. This test is designed to give an indication of the baking performance of a dough over a time span of 135 min similar to that of a fermented dough. With modem shorttime doughs the first stretch at 45 min is probably the most important one. With modem, untreated bread flours the resistance will usually be around the middle of the graph (Figure 12.5), but with weaker biscuit types, the curve will usually be well below the 200 BU line. In these cases it may be necessary to use an amended method for the Extensograph that uses a higher level of salt (CCFRA FTP method 0016). This brings the curve nearer the centre of the graph and so gives a more reliable result. Alveograph This testing equipment and method is very popular in France and elsewhere, and is used to great effect for defining the parameters for a good baguette flour. Figure 12.4 Examples of farinograms in which the flours become stronger, left to right and more elastic, top to bottom (based on data published by NABIM). {{page:326}} Essentially a dough is prepared using a set quantity of water and salt, and then extruded from the mixer and shaped following a standard method. After a resting period, the dough piece is clamped into a metal ring and inflated, while the pressure inside the bubble is measured against time and plotted on a graph (Figure 12.6). The characteristics of the dough can then be assessed using the shape and area of the curve thus obtained. Use of testing equipment None of the equipment and testing methods described above will predict the suitability of a flour for all bakery uses; with all testing methods, assumptions have to be made about the particular product, for instance the following. • Using the Farinograph, the standard water absorption test is carried out at 30°C (86°F) in a low-speed, Z-blade mixer. We can reasonably ask the question 'What does this tell us about the effects on flour performance of harsher mixing regimes at cooler temperatures'? • The Extensograph is a classic test but is only two-dimensional, i.e. a standard dough stretched at a standard rate. Dough consistency, resting times, temperatures, rates of stretch, can all be changed but what effect will such changes have on the interpretation of the results and prediction of breadmaking potential? • Using the Alveograph, well-documented tests exist for baguette flours, but the fixed level of water makes it unacceptable with stronger flours since dough consistency is not optimized for some breadmaking processes. Figure 12.5 Typical extenso graphs for top, a biscuit and bottom. a bread flour, left to right, testing time 45, 90 and 135 min (based on data published by NABIM). {{page:327}} FLOUR MILLING w ...... 11-------- L ---------1.~ Figure 12.6 TYPical alveograph (based on data pubhshed by NABIM) So what are the answers to our dilemma for assessing the breadmaking potential of flours from rheological testing methods? How can customers define the flours they require? To answer such questions we have to go back to our definition of quality - 'fitness for purpose'. Some products will be very tolerant to abuse or at least be used in breadmaking processes where small differences are less important. For these, flour can be defined by specifying a bare minimum of parameters; perhaps just protein content, moisture and colour are all that will be necessary. However, other products and processes are less forgiving, and so in these cases it is up to the baker and the miller to work together to find the right quality definitions. Generally it will be a combination of the tests available, or possibly it will include something developed specifically, e.g. viscosity using a viscometer, or particle size perhaps. Whatever the answer happens to be, the customer can be assured that millers will do everything in their power to get the flour right the first time. Glossary of milling terms used in this chapter Aspiration A process using air to remove fine impurities from wheat Break rolls Fluted rolls designed to open up grains and release the endosperm The process of bringing a wheat to the correct moisture Conditioning content for milling The amount of white flour extracted from the wheat, Extraction rate expressed as a percentage Sieving of the various flour stocks Flour dressing The blend of wheats for a particular flour Grist {{page:328}} Hectolitre weight A measurement of wheat density, expressed kilograms per hectolitre Low-grade Flour of poor colour and poor functionality Overtail Name given to a stock which is too large to pass through a given sieve size Reduction rolls Smooth surfaced rolls designed to reduce semolina to flour Semolina Coarse particles of endosperm Screen Sieve mesh Screenings Impurities removed from wheat as received at the mill Screenroom Part of the mill process designed to clean grain Silo A building for grain or flour storage Stock The mill feed Straight run Flour with approximately 76-78% extraction rate Throughs (thro's) Name given to the stock which passes through a given sieve Patent flour A flour produced from just top-quality mill streams with a very good colour References AACC (1995) Approved Methods of the American AssoczatlOn of Cereal ChemIsts, 9th edn, March, St Paul, Mmnesota, USA Method 39-70A, Wheat hardness as determmed by near mfrared reflectance Method 46--30, Crude protem - combustIOn method AOAC (1990) Ojficzal Methods o/the AssoczatlOn o/Ojficzal Analytical Chemists, 15th edn, AOAC, Washmgton DC, USA Method 972 37 a and b, Extraneous matenals IsolatIOn Alldnck, A (1993) Fohc aCid and neural-tube defects Chorleywood Digest No 124, February, CCFRA, Cluppmg Campden, UK Alldnck, A (1994) Fohc aCid - revIsited Chorleywood Digest, No 133, January, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK, pp 9-10 Bread and Flour RegulatIOns (1995) UK SI 3202, HMSO, London BS 4317 Part 3 (1987) DetermmatlOn of mOisture content of cereals and cereal products (routme method), BntJsh Standards InstJtute, London BS 4317 Part 30 (1994) (ISO 8981 1993) IdentIficatIOn of wheat varletles by electrophoresIs, BntJsh Standards InstJtute, London Cauvam, S P (1987) Effects of bran, germ, and low grade flours on CBP bread quality FMBRA Report No 138, December, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK Cauvam S P and Chamberlam N (1988) The bread Improvmg effects of fungal amylase Journal of Cereal SCience, 8, 239-48 Cauvam, S P , DaVIS, J A and Fearn, T (1985) Flour characterIstics and fungal amylase m the Chorleywood Bread Process FMBRA Report No 121, March, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK Cauvam, S P, Chamberlam, N , Collms T H and DaVIS, J A (1983) The dlstnbutlOn of dietary fibre and bakmg quality among null fractIOns of CBP bread flour FMBRA Report No 105, July, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK CCFRA FIP (1991) CCFRA Flour Testmg Panel Methods Handbook, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK Method no 0003, DetenrunatJon of rheological propertJes of doughs usmg a Brabender Extensograph Method no 0004, DetermmatlOn of water absorptIOn and rheological properties of doughs usmg a Brabender Fannograph Method no 0006, DetenrunatlOn of Falling number {{page:329}} FLOUR MILLING Method no 0007/1, DetermmatlOn of Grade Colour usmg natIOnal standard wIth partIcular reference to the use of an ultImate mternal standard tile Method no 0007/2, DetermmatlOn of Grade Colour for senes 2 mstruments Method no 0008, DetennmatlOn of mOIsture content by oven drymg Method no 0009, Detenmnatlon of protem content wIth the Tecator KJeltec 1030 auto system or eqUIvalent analysIs system Method no 0013, DetenmnatlOn of gluten content usmg the Falhng Number Glutomattc Method no 0014, Detenmnatlon of protem and mOIsture contents by near mfrared reflectance Method no 0016, Detenmnatlon of rheologIcal propertIes usmg a Brabender Extensograph (alternative method for use wIth weak, whIte flours) Chamberlam, N (1984) Dned gluten m breadmakmg - the new challenge, m Brztlsh SocIety of Bakmg 30th Annual Meetmg and 59th Conference Proceedmgs, November, pp 14-18 Chamberlam, N, Collms, T H and McDermott, E E (1977) The Chorleywood Bread Process the effects of alpha-amylase activIty on commercIal bread FMBRA Report No 73, June, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK Colhns, T H (1985) Breadmakmg processes, m Master Bakers' Book of Breadmakmg, 2nd edn (ed J Brown), Turret-Wheatland Ltd, Rlckmansworth, UK, pp 1-46 Dosland, 0 (1995) The Chester heat expenment AssoczatlOn of OperatIves MIllers - Bulletm, September, 6615-8 EC (1996) CouncIl DIrective 96/331EC of 21 May 1996 amendmg the Annexes to DIrectives 86/3621EEC and 86/3631EEC on the flxmg of maximum levels for pestIcIde resIdues m and on cereals and foodstuffs of ammal ongm respectively Officzal Journal European CommUnities (1996),39, Ll44, 18 June, 35-8 EC COmmlsslOn CounCIl RegulatIOn EC/315/93 Evers, AD (1993) On-hne quantIfIcatIOn of bran parucles m whIte flour Food SCIence and Technology Today, 7(1), 23-6 Fandl, Hand Rasper, V F (1987) The Alveograph Handbook, AACC, St Paul, Mmnesota Fnsvad, J C and Samson, R A (1992) FIlamentous fungI m foods and feeds ecology, spOIlage, and mycotoxm productIon, m Handbook of Applzed Mycology, Vol 3, Foods and Feeds (eds D K Arora, K G MukerJl and E H Marth), Marcel Dekker, New York, pp 31-68 Hook, S C W (1982) DetermmatlOn of wheat hardness - an evaluatIOn of thIS aspect of wheat specIfIcatIOn FMBRA Bulletm No 1, February, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK, pp 12-23 Mans, PI, Fearn, T, Mason, M J et al (1990) NIROS AutomatIc control of gluten addItIOn to flour FMBRA Report No 143, November, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK MelvJlle, J and Shattock, H T (1938) The actIOn of ascorbic aCid as a bread Improver Cereal ChemIstry, 15, 201-5 Montreal Protocol (1993) On Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, Montreal, 16 September 1987 AdoptIon of Annex D, Treaty Senes No 14, HMSO, London PotassIUm Bromate (ProhIbItIOn as a Flour Improver) RegulatIOns (1990) UK SI 399, HMSO, London Satake, R S (1990) Debranmng process IS new approach to wheat mIllIng World Gram, 8(b), 28, 30-2 Wade, P (1995) BISCUitS, CookIes and Crackers, Vol 1, The Prmclples of the Craft, Blackle Acadeffilc & ProfeSSIOnal, Glasgow, UK {{page:347}}
