---
book: "Technology of Breadmaking"
book_slug: "cauvain-technology-of-breadmaking"
author: "Stanley P. Cauvain & Linda S. Young"
lang: "en"
relevance: "core"
chapter: "Chapter 13: Other cereals in breadmaking"
heading: "Chapter 13: Other cereals in breadmaking"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 13: Other cereals in breadmaking"]
order: 13
source_page: 347
tokens_est: 13190
---

# Chapter 13: Other cereals in breadmaking

{{page:347}} STANLEY P. CAUVAIN Introduction The main thrust of the previous chapters has been accented towards the production of bread from 100% wheat flours but, although such products are universal, there are some bread products around the world which are based on or include a high proportion of non-wheat cereals. In breadmaking terms, rye is the closest of the cereals to wheat with similar protein contents but a distinctly limited ability to form gluten. The closeness of wheat and rye has led to their crossing and the first 'artificial' cereal - triticale - which may also be used for breadmaking (Gustafson et aI., 1991). In the past, maize (com), barley, oats, sorghum, millet and rice have all found their way into bread products at some time, usually when wheat and rye have been in short supply. More recently, in countries where these other cereals are commonly grown, they have been utilized in breadmaking to reduce the proportion of wheat flour being used if economic conditions necessitate the reduction of wheat imports. In some cases it is possible to make a product which has some of the attributes of wheat breads with mixtures of some of these cereals by utilizing the gelatinization properties of their starches to form a bread-like, aerated structure. In these circumstances the lack of gas-holding capabilities of any proteins present in the flour must be compensated for by adding other bubblestabilizing materials. Rye bread Of all the non-wheat breads, those based on rye are the most common with production in central and eastern Europe and North America. Rye is also grown as a feed wheat in Asia and South America. Although probably of Mediterranean origin (Lorenz, 1991), cultivated rye (Secale cereale) is typically a plant of cool northern climates where it is better able to withstand the winter cold and grow farther north than any other cereal, hence its current favoured cultivation areas in northern Europe and North America. Rye is able to grow on a wider range of soil fertilities than wheat and is mostly sown in the autumn (fall) to overwinter. © Thomson Science 1998 {{page:331}} OTHER CEREALS IN BREADMAKING Rye milling is a multi-stage process of similar complexity to that of wheat milling, with a number of break and reduction roll passages feeding sifters where the stocks are separated into various intermediate fractions and finished flours (Rozsa, 1976). The numbers of rye flours and meals available and their classification varies according to the country of production. Key quality attributes are ash contents and colour, with low-ash rye flours being referred to as 'white' and high-ash flours as 'dark'. The high levels of pentosans present in rye flours largely inhibit their ability to form gluten, and so in rye bread doughs the proteins playa lesser role in the structure-forming process. The quantities of pentosans and other soluble materials are particularly important in relation to breadmaking properties, and rye flours contain large quantities of matter which is twice as soluble in water compared with wheat flours. The starch in rye gelatinizes at a relatively low temperature, 55-70°C (130-160°F), which coincides with the temperature range for maximum alphaamylase activity. Rye has a low sprouting resistance and as a result particular attention is focused on enzymic activity in rye flour specifications, with measurement of Falling Number and Brabender Amylographs being common (Drews and Seibel, 1976). The overall enzymic activity in rye flours is high compared with that of wheat flours, together with the potential for significant cellulase and proteinase activities being present. Evaluations of the potential of rye flour for making a particular type of bread are usually based on the interpretation of Brabender amylograms. Breads based on or containing rye are most commonly seen in the USA, and central and eastern Europe. The methods of manufacture and forms that the breads take differ noticeably between these two centres of production. The variety of rye breads is greatest in Germany where there are four main classes of bread, depending on the proportion of rye to wheat in the formula, which may use any of four raw materials to give a potential 16 bread combinations (Meuser et at., 1994). In the USA the range of rye breads tends to be less well defined and is generally fewer in number than in central Europe. Pumpernickel is a special rye bread produced on both sides of the Atlantic but in quite different forms. In order to restrict amylolytic activity and breakdown of starch during baking, acidification of rye bread doughs has become common. Traditionally, lactic acid fermentation through a sour dough is preferred, although direct acidification can be achieved by the addition of acids such as citric or tartaric acid. Acidification of rye doughs improves their physical properties by making them more elastic and extensible and confers the acid flavour notes so characteristic of rye breads. Sour dough methods The sour dough method begins with a 'starter' based on a pure sour culture prepared by inoculating sterile nutrient media with the appropriate bacteria. Initially in the pure culture, some dark rye flour and water are mixed to form {{page:332}} a soft dough at 27°C (80°F) which is blended with salt, more rye flour and water to form the sour dough. Commonly the starter is used at the rate of 20% of the sour dough. Subsequent starters can take the form of a portion of the sour dough which has been stored at SoC (40°F). The starter may be stored for a few days or even up to 6 months, though by this time the purity of the culture will have been lost and it is better to begin again with a new pure culture. The activity of the sour dough needs to be controlled in order to inhibit the activity of unwanted microorganisms. This is usually achieved through the addition of about 2% salt (based on flour weight). A fairly slack dough consistency is required for the sour dough; typically water absorptions will range from 80 to 100% for rye meals and flours. The sour dough is formed at a temperature around 3SoC (9S0F) and allowed to cool to about 20°C (68°F) over a 24 h period. During this time the pH of the sour dough typically falls from around S.8 to 3.S. The sour dough can be used for up to 9 days after preparation. Dehydrated sours in dry powder form have become increasingly popular with bakers. Based on pregelatinized flours, organic acids or their salts and a dehydrated sour dough extract, they are more convenient to handle and ensure consistency of performance in doughmaking. Their rate of addition varies according to their source and individual preferences, but is typically about 2-6% based on total flour weight. Doughmaking The sour dough is blended with the other ingredients using a low or mediumspeed mixer. The proportion of the sour to the other ingredients will vary according to the type of bread being made. A sample recipe for the production of rye wholemeal bread is given in Table 13.1. Intensive mixing is not normally required for rye doughs because they are not able to form gluten. Mixing times between Sand 30 min are used depending on the type of mixer and its speed. Coarse rye wholemeals and whole rye grain doughs require longer mixing times. Dryness and crumbliness in rye bread can be avoided by presoaking or scalding part of the rye wholemeal before doughmaking. Between 10 and 20% of the Table 13.1 Example of rye wholemeal formulation kg 80.0 Sour dough 60.0 Rye wholemeal 1.2' Salt Yeast 1.0 25.0 Water '0.8 kg salt contained in the sour dough. {{page:333}} OTHER CEREALS IN BREADMAKING meal is scaled with an equal weight of water 3 h before doughmaking and allowed to cool before adding it to the other ingredients. Water-binding substances are sometimes used as 'improvers' in rye bread, typically up to 3% of pregelatinized potato, maize or rice starches, or a hydrocolloid or gum. A whole range of optional ingredients may be added to rye doughs for flavour or texture; they include buttermilk, soured milk, curd cheese, dried fruits and nuts. Baking Rye breads may be baked in pans, as oven-bottom (hearth) or even as batch breads. A traditional practice for oven-bottom rye breads is to prove the dough in a dusted basket, in the past made of whicker but now more likely plastic, which leaves a 'ribbed' appearance on the dough surface when the dough pieces are tipped out onto the oven sole for baking. Oven-bottom rye breads are often given a deep cut from the surface to about half-way down the dough piece. This improves heat transfer to the rather dense dough and prevents ragged breads along the side of the dough. Cutting also adds variety of form to the dough surface. Baking conditions vary with bread variety and oven type. The lighter varieties can be baked under similar conditions of time and temperature to wheat breads, while darker and wholemeal forms may require up to 55 min for an 880 g loaf. A common procedure is to bake it first for about 20 min at 260°C (5000 P) using a considerable amount of steam and then complete the baking at a lower temperature, typically 200°C (3900P). Rye wholemeal bread can be baked using a form of steam-pressure cooking to avoid the formation of a normal crust. The dough pieces are held in tightly closed pans and put into an autoclave-type steam chamber for 5-8 h at 2000e or 16-24 h at 100°C (312°P). The advantages claimed for this type of process include better nutritional value and moisture retention in the finished bread. This baking process causes a darkening of the crumb and a bittersweet taste. American rye breads The four basic types of rye bread produced in the USA were first described by Weberpals (1950): • A light rye bread made with a blend of wheat and rye flours, typically in the proportions 60:40. • A heavy rye bread made with a sour dough process. • A light, sweet, pan rye bread, a mixture of wheat and rye flours and made with a straight dough process. • Light and dark pumpernickel made with a sour dough process. This product is quite unlike the original German pumpernickel and often contains fat and molasses in the USA. {{page:334}} Keeping qualities of rye breads The lower pH of rye breads, especially those made with sour doughs, inhibits microbial growth and confers a longer shelf life than that commonly seen with wheat bread products. The shelf life of rye bread may be further extended using a pasteurization or sterilization process. Such processing is usually carried out on the wrapped product so that the film used must be heat stable and have good barrier properties. The condensation developed within the wrapper is later reabsorbed into the product and has no adverse effect on product quality at the time of consumption. Some darkening of the products may occur but this has relatively little importance for rye breads, which tend to have naturally dark crumb colours. Conventional hot air ovens, steam chambers and microwave heating have all been used for the sterilization process. After treatment, the shelf life of rye bread may extend for up to 24 months. Triticale Interest in triticale stems in part from its nutritional properties, with higher protein levels and a more acceptable amino acid composition than wheat (Gustafson et al., 1991). Intensive work to produce high-yielding varieties with improved product performance has taken place in Poland (Achremowicz, 1993) and elsewhere for about 20 years, which might lead to its wider acceptance as a foodstuff. Triticale grains are milled in a similar manner to wheat and rye and can yield straight run flours with relatively low ash contents. Wheat milling techniques tend to give higher extraction rates and are therefore preferred. Early strains of triticale gave flours with poor baking performance, in part because of higher alpha-amylase activity and lower paste viscosity than wheat flours (Lorenz, 1972) and in part because of weaker protein qualities, although a wide variation in the rheological properties in triticale flours has been noted (Macri et al., 1986). Later developments of triticale varieties and the use of bread improvers, such as SSL (Tsen et al., 1973), have brought the baking performance closer to that of wheat flours, although the 'quality gap' is still significant. Achremowicz (1993) found that triticale bread baked with a three-stage method using a rye preferment gave a loaf which rose well with the required shape, had an elastic crumb and pleasing odour and flavour. The bread remained fresh for a long period. The basic elements of the breadmaking process he used were: • a preferment based on rye flour at 10% total flour fermented for 24 h at 28°C (82°P); • a sour with 50% of the total triticale flour, 1-2% yeast and water to a total of 200%, fermented for 3 h at 32°C (90 0 P); • a dough based on the sour, the balance of flour as triticale, 1.5% salt and water to a dough yield of about 160%, fermented for 30 min at 32°C; {{page:335}} OTHER CEREALS IN BREADMAKING • unit pieces were proved for 25-45 min at 32°C; • baking at about 240°C (464°P). In summary, we can see that triticale has some potential in breadmaking, although the performance of triticale flours is closer to that of rye rather than that of wheat. In areas where wheat cannot be grown successfully because the land or farming practices have marginal agricultural potential, triticale offers a viable alternative to wheat and greater potential than rye. Acceptable bread quality is achieved using rye bread manufacturing techniques rather than those used for wheat breads. However, given the improvements which it has undergone since its introduction, triticale has been successfully transformed from 'scientific curiosity to a viable crop' (Varughese et al., 1996). Other grains and seeds in bread The never-ending quest by marketing departments for new products to tempt consumers, and for ingenuity in product developers, has led to the development of many 'new' breads with special characters and in some cases specific nutritional properties. Levels of addition of non-wheat grains are usually quite modest and are made to a suitably strengthened wheat flour-based dough. Since the latter has to carry materials which are unlikely to contribute positively to the gas retention or dough rheology in the system, special attention must be focused on the qualities of the base wheat flour, improvers and the breadmaking process which is to be used. A wide range of grains and seeds might be added to wheat flour doughs and so only a limited number of examples have been chosen to highlight some of the technical issues which may arise in bread production. Multi-grain breads In multi-grain breads it is usual to add a portion of whole, cracked or kibbled grains to the wheat flour base. Ready-prepared premixes are available from millers and other suppliers which may include improvers, flavouring and colouring agents. While cleaned grains can be added directly to the wheat flour dough, some problems can arise from this procedure. Like wheat, other grains are subjected to microbial contamination during growth and harvesting and this can be carried through to the final product. Of particular concern is the presence of the ropeforming bacteria Bacillus subtilis (Chapter 10) with its potential for causing product spoilage after baking. Thorough cleaning of the grain and some form of heat or surface treatment may be helpful in reducing the levels of microorganisms. The other main problem with adding large particles of grains directly to bread {{page:336}} doughs is related to their hardness, which will be considerably greater than that of the surrounding bread crumb. This will certainly provide a contrast in textures but may also result in a rapid trip to the dentist! To obviate this problem, whole grains are often given a short period of soaking to reduce their hardness, a technique often used in treating grains for animal feed (Kent and Evers, 1994). Steam rolling and steam flaking may also be used, depending on the particular form of the grain required. Raising the moisture content of the grains is not without risk since the higher water levels will provide the potential for extra microbial growth. Modifying nutritional properties with non-wheat sources Bread, especially wholemeal (wholewheat), is a naturally rich source of dietary fibre. The fibre largely derives from the bran skins of the wheat berry. There have been some product developments which have sought to raise the level of dietary fibre in breads by using fibre sources other than those occurring in wheat. In some cases the drive behind such developments has been to increase the nutritional value of white bread while retaining appeal to some sectors of consumers. While wholemeal and similar high-bran breads have the required nutrition, their appeal appears to be limited with younger consumers who seem to prefer the textural and flavour characteristics of white bread. The introduction of a white-coloured fibre source, such as pea fibre, enabled the development of bread products which met the requirements of both younger consumer groups and nutritionists. As with bran in wholemeal flour, the pea fibre does not playa positive role in promoting gas retention in the dough or in improving its rheological character, so that formulations must take into account the dilution effect of the fibre on the functionality of the system. Additions of extra protein as dried wheat gluten will be helpful. Oats are another grain which has attracted attention for use in wheat breads. In this case it has been favoured because of the presence of beta-glucans and their potential beneficial effects in reducing cholesterol levels in the bloodstream. Oats also have a high lipid content for a cereal and so are prone to rancidity (McMullen, 1991) and long-term storage requires inactivation of enzymic activity to reduce the likelihood of rancidity. When added to wheat flour doughs, oat flours reduce the ability of the system to hold gas and the final loaf has a bland taste and firm texture. For these reasons oats have only become an established ingredient in bread products when its nutritional contribution can override its adverse effects on bread quality. Malted barley Barley is grown in large quantities around the world and in many places rivals the production of wheat. Its main use with respect to human consumption is in the brewing industry. The malting of barley grains produces distinctive flavours {{page:337}} OTHER CEREALS IN BREADMAKING which are carried through to the final product, and because of this the grain has found some use in the baking industry. After the various stages of the malting process, a milled barley malt may be produced for use in breadmaking. This powdered form will have a high diastatic (enzymic) activity which can be used to supplement breadmaking flours. The enzymic activity is usually dominated by (cereal) alpha-amylase and proteolytic enzymes. The former can be beneficial in improving the gas retention abilities of flours, although such enzyme-active malt flours should be used with caution in breads which are later to be sliced, because of the high levels of dextrins which will be produced during dough processing and baking (Chapter 3). The proteolytic activity can also have both beneficial and adverse effects since they cause softening of the dough. Some softening can improve dough machinability, but too much may cause doughs to stick to equipment surfaces during moulding and intermediate proof. In addition to using malt flours it is possible to use malt extracts and syrups. These too will have some enzymic activity but are more likely to be used by bakers for their contribution to flavour. They find use in some special 'malt' breads seen in some parts of the world, especially the UK. In such cases the sticky crumb resulting from the high enzyme activity is seen as a positive attribute. Gas retention in these specialist doughs can be so great and the crumb density at the centre so low that the loaves will collapse during conventional cooling. They therefore require the use of vacuum cooling to preserve the integrity of their structures (Chapter 5). Wheatless breads While rye and triticale breads may fall within the category of 'wheatless' breads, this section heading is intended to cover those cereal products which are not normally considered for the production of bread because they lack proteins capable of forming gluten in even the smallest quantities. Neither is it proposed to discuss the use of such cereals in 'composite' flours where they have been blended with wheat to reduce the wheat component, or where dried gluten has been added. Such practices are common in countries wishing to make a bread product but also wishing to reduce the importation of wheats. For the cereals which will be discussed under this heading the main structureforming component in the flour will be based on the indigenous cereal starch, supplemented on occasions with other stabilizers to ensure stability of the gas bubbles in the 'dough'. Yeast and the generation of carbon dioxide gas by fermentation will be essential ingredients in the formulations and processing methods considered. The technology of producing wheatless breads has much in common with the production of 'gluten-free' breads for sufferers of dietary disorders or allergies associated with gluten from wheat and rye flours. A range of 'gluten-free' {{page:338}} products has been developed by a number of commercial companies based on wheat starch from which all traces of protein have been removed. The 'dough' which is formed from such starch-based formulations is much closer to the viscosity of a cake batter than a bread dough, and because of this similarity many of the techniques used to stabilize gas bubbles during processing and baking are derived from cake production. This being the case, it is appropriate to begin a discussion of these forms of wheatless breads by considering the mechanisms which operate in cake batters during processing and baking. Formation of cake batters Cakes are produced by forming a complex emulsion and foam system - the batter - which is processed by being heat set. When eggs and sugar are whisked together during the mixing of the batter, large numbers of minute air bubbles are trapped in the batter by the surface-active proteins of the egg white and the lipoproteins, which form a protective film around the gas bubbles and prevents them coalescing. Other surface-active materials, such as distilled monoglycerides, may be used to augment the effect of the egg proteins (Cauvain and Cyster, 1996). This is especially true if oil or fat is added to the batter. If the level of added fat is increased sufficiently, the solid fat can take on the role of stabilizing the air bubbles. In this latter case the fat crystals align themselves around the air bubbles, thereby trapping and stabilizing them. This is possible because the oil fraction of the fat allows the crystals to move and at the same time stick to each other like links in a chain. The ratio of liquid to crystalline fat, and the size of the individual crystals, are very important in controlling cake quality (compare with the effects of solid fat in the CBP; Chapter 3). As the temperature of the batter rises in the oven, these bubbles expand and eventually, just as the mass of batter is setting, they burst into one another to form the porous structure of cake crumb. In the case of cake batters, carbon dioxide gas will be generated by the added baking powder and will add to the inflation of the initial air bubbles. The similarities between bubble creation in cake batters and bread doughs are clear even if the mechanisms by which they are stabilized are quite different. There is no significant gluten formation in cake batters, in part due to the higher water levels, the presence of higher fat levels and the presence of sugar. During the early stages of heating in the oven, the viscosity of the batter slows down the movement of the gases in the system so that the batter expands. In the absence of gluten formation a significant contribution to the final product structure comes from the gelatinization of the starch in the flour and it is that property which must be exploited when making wheatless breads. Bread without wheat Since bread products do not contain the high levels of fat and sugar that occur in cakes, we have to seek alternative means for trapping and stabilizing gas {{page:339}} OTHER CEREALS IN BREAD MAKING bubbles in wheatless breads. Gums, stabilizers and pre gelatinized starch can all be used to provide part or all of the gas occlusion and stabilizing mechanisms we require. For example, Satin (1988) reported on the replacement of dried gluten with xanthan gum in cassava and sorghum-based breads and then replacement of the gum with some pre gelatinized starch. The addition of a protein source with some cereals is also helpful in heat setting the wheatless bread 'dough' to prevent product collapse. Satin (1988) suggested powdered egg whites or a legume flour. Yeast can be used as the alternative source of carbon dioxide in the dough rather than baking powder, or they can be used together. The yeast will provide gas for bubble expansion in proof provided that sufficient substrate is available for fermentation to proceed. If insufficient substrate is available, then small additions of sugar may be needed to assist the yeast. Salt should be added for flavour. Mixing methods for wheatless bread doughs can vary from the basic, e.g. by hand, to mechanical, planetary-style and even high-speed, continuous battertype mixers. Because wheatless bread doughs are more fluid than wheat doughs and closer in viscosity to cake batters, it is usual to bake the material in a rectangular or round bread pan. The pans should be well greased but they do not normally require any form of additional lining. There are many potential recipes for wheatless breads and the following are a few examples by way of illustrating the potential for such developments. Cassava bread (Satin, 1988) % flour weight 100 Cassava flour Sugar 4.9 2.3 Egg white powder 2.3 Salt Oil 5.7 Yeast 5.7 120 Water • Take 15 parts of the flour and boil with the water for 4 min. • Replace evaporated water, add the remaining ingredients and mix for 10 min. • If powdered yeast is used rehydrate with a little sugar and water before use. • Scale into a pan, leave to prove and bake. Rice or maize bread (Satin, 1989) % flour weight Rice or maize starch 100 4.4 Sugar 1.7 Salt 1.7 Oil {{page:340}} Yeast (fresh) 1.0 140 Water • Take 17 parts of the starch and boll with 92 parts water until translucent. • Add the remaining ingredients and mix for 5 min. • Scale into a pan, leave to prove and bake. Sorghum bread (Figure 13.1) % flour weIght 100 Sorghum flour 4.2 Yeast (compressed) 2.1 Salt 12.0 Skimmed milk powder Sodium carboxy methyl cellulose 1.0 100 Water 2.0 Baking powder 2.0 Soya flour • Mix the ingredients for 6 min using a planetary mixer. • Scale 460 g (lIb) into rectangular bread pans. • Prove untIl the dough reaches the top of the pan, then bake. Sorghum and mmze bread usmg a contmuous mzxer (Figure 13.2) % flour weIght Sorghum flour 50 Maize starch 50 8.3 Yeast (compressed) Figure 13.1 Sorghum bread {{page:341}} OTHER CEREALS IN BREAD MAKING Figure 13.2 Sorghum and maIze bread usmg a contmuous Illlxer Salt 2.1 Skimmed milk powder 12.0 Sodium carboxy methyl cellulose 1.0 Dried egg albumen 15 Water 80 • Blend the ingredients on a planetary mixer and then pass through a continuous cake batter-type mixer. • Scale, prove and bake. Sorghum flat breads (Figure 13.3) % flour weight 50 Sorghum flour 50 Maize starch 2.1 Yeast (compressed) 1.8 Salt Fat 0.7 1.0 Improver 80 Water • Mix for 5 min. • Sheet to about 15 mm (0.5 in) thick and cut out suitable shapes. • Bake on flat sheet or hotplate for approximately 15 min. The success, or otherwise, of much wheatless bread production, as with any other bread type, lies in being able to obtain consistently a raw material of known characteristics. It is unfortunate that in many cases the attributes {{page:342}} Figure 13.3 Sorghum flat bread required from the flour, meal or starch are, as yet, not fully appreciated, so that baking results and final bread quality may be somewhat variable. Nevertheless sufficient work has been done to show the considerable potential for wheatless breads and the opportunities this can provide for bread production in countries which have little wheat available. Unleavened breads Many of the unleavened breads seen in different parts of the world are based on wheat flour, although seldom in the same form as we would see for the production of 'Western-style' breads since they are not always based on 'white' flour. In many cases the wheat flours used can be described as 'high extraction', brown and occasionally wholemeal and so can be considered under the general heading of this chapter. A few unleavened products are based on maize and other non-wheat cereals. The most usual form of unleavened breads is flat. They seldom contain yeast, though they may make use of sour or old doughs and in some cases sodium bicarbonate. In addition to their flatness, most of the unleavened breads will have a characteristic split or 'pocket' created during baking and which remains in the cooled product. This distinctive feature can be used to hold a filling because the bread will 'puff-up' when reheated. There are a wide range of flat breads made around the world and some of these are given in Table 8.1. In Egypt the term 'balady' probably covers around 30 variations (Evans, 1983). To illustrate the range of flat breads a few examples {{page:343}} OTHER CEREALS IN BREAD MAKING are given below, but bear in mind that with traditional products such as these, recipes will vary widely (everyone has their own favourite!). Recipes for unleavened breads Balady % flour weight Starter 11 Old dough 100 Flour Water 50 Dough Flour 100 Water 75.0 Salt 0.6 Starter 10.0 • Use a flour of about 85% extraction (or a blend of 75% white and 25% wholemeal). • Mix for about 20 min to produce a soft dough. • Scale at 180 g (6 oz), mould round. • After 15 min intermediate proof, flatten. • Prove for 1 h and bake. Chapattis % flour weight Flour 100 70 Water Optional Salt Optional Oil • Use a flour with about 85% extraction. • Mix to form a soft dough, rest for 30 min. • Scale around 50 g (2 oz), mould round. • After a short rest roll out to about 2 mm (0.1 in) and bake with one or two turns. Naan % flour weight White flour 100 3.8 Yeast 0.6 Salt 1.3 Baking powder 2.5 Caster sugar Egg 15.0 {{page:344}} Oil 7.5 15.0 Natural yoghurt 43.8 Milk • Mix to a dough and ferment for 1 h. • Scale at 110 g (4 oz) and mould to an oval shape. • Bake (traditionally on the sides of a Tandoor oven). Papadams % flour weight Blackgram flour 100 Water 45 8 Salt 1 Sodium bicarbonate • Blackgram flour comes from the pulse, Phaseolus mungo. • Mix to a soft and sticky dough, rest for 30 min. • Scale at 20 g (0.75 oz) and pin out. • Dry to reduce moisture content to about 15% before frying. Tortillas % flour weight 100 Whole maize flour 33 Water Lime (calcium hydroxide) 0.1 • Mix to form a 'masa' (dough). • Divide and mould round before pinning out to 2 mm (0.1 in) thick. • Bake on a hotplate. Flours for unleavened breads Although unleavened and flat breads are products which are not expected to achieve and maintain high specific volumes (low densities), they do demand quite specific characteristics from many of the flours used in their production, especially wheat flours. The difficulty for the miller supplying bakers of flat breads is that the product requirements are subject to significant local variation and flour properties are often ill-defined. There are two critical areas in the production of unleavened breads where wheat flour characteristics play major roles; one is in the doughmaking stage and the other is during baking. In dough preparation the quality of the protein in the wheat flour will significantly affect the way in which the dough piece deforms under sheeting. High resistance to deformation and significant elasticity will result in the dough pieces tearing when thinly sheeted, and loss of shape {{page:345}} OTHER CEREALS IN BREADMAKING after forming as elastic regain in the dough takes effect. The flour must be capable of producing a dough with good extensibility, so that tearing during sheeting is minimized and that the dough is capable of considerable and rapid expansion during the short baking cycle. Treatment of wheat flours is not normally required for these products since most treatments tend to make the dough less extensible. Protein content is probably of lesser importance than protein quality. Conclusions Although the majority of bread products are based on wheat, it is possible to use other cereals in bread production. In many cases the other cereals are seen as 'additions' to make wheat breads 'more interesting' (e.g. multi-grain breads), although many cereals are capable of making products with special characters of their own, e.g. rye bread. In many parts of the world unleavened or flat breads have evolved with the passage of time and they too have become products in their own right with specific characters and raw material requirements. In many countries, for example in Africa, the growing of wheat presents some difficulties with our present skills and technology. In these countries the concept of bread is well known, having been carried there with trading and social links, but the purchase of wheat itself presents other challenges for the populations concerned. In such cases, alternative and locally available cereals may be used to make breads with many of the attributes of those made with wheat. Breadmaking has always provided diversity of form, shape and flavour, even when the products have been based exclUSIvely on wheat, but as we Improve our understanding of the properties of our available raw materials the opportumties for adding other cereals increase dramatically. Customers are always seeking novel products and new taste sensations, and with the wide range of cereals available for breadmaking there are many more new products waiting to be developed. References Achremowlcz. B (1993) Use of Tntlcale for bread productIOn 10 Poland Chorleywood Dzgest No 132, NovemberlDecember, CCFRA, Clnppmg Campden, UK, pp 115-20 Cauvam. S P and Cyster, J (1996) Sponge cake technology CCFRA Revzew No 2, January, CCFRA, ChIppmg Campden, UK Drews, E and Seibel, W (1976) Bread-bakmg and otber uses around tbe world, 10 Rye Productzon, Chemistry and Technology (ed W Bushuk), Amencan ASSOCiatIOn of Cereal Chell11sts, St Paul, Mmnesota, USA, pp 127-78 Evans, K (1983) Ethmc breads FMBRA Bulletzn No 5, October, CCFRA, Chlppmg Campden, UK, pp 240-7 Gustafson, J P, Bushuck, Wand Dera, A R (199\) Tnucale ProductIOn and UtilizatIOn, 10 {{page:346}} Handbook of Cereal Science and Technology (eds KJ. Lorenz and K. Kulp), Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 373-400. Kent, N.L and Evers, A.D. (1994) Kent's Technology of Cereals, Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, UK. Lorenz,K. (1972) Food uses of Triticale. Hybrids of wheat and rye can be used in bread, rolls and noodles. Food Technology, 26, 66-74. Lorenz, K.L. (1991) Rye, in Handbook of Cereal Science and Technology (eds KJ. Lorenz and K. Kulp), Marcel Dekker, New York, pp.331-71. Macri, LJ., Ballance, G.M. and Larter, E.N. (1986) Factors affecting the breadmaking potential of four secondary hexaploid triticales. Cereal Chemistry, 63, 263-6. McMullen, M.S. (1991) Oats, in Handbook of Cereal Science and Technology (eds KJ. Lorenz and K. Kulp), Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 199-232. Meuser, F., Brummer, J.-M. and Seibel, W. (1994) Bread varieties in Central Europe. Cereal Foods World, April, 222-30. Rozsa, T.A. (1976) Rye Milling in Rye: Production, Chemistry and Technology (ed. W. Bushuk), American Association of Cereal Chemists, St Paul, Minnesota, USA, pp. 111-26. Satin, M. (1988) Bread without wheat. New Scientist, 28 April, 56-9. Satin, M. (1989) Wheatless breads. FAO leaflet, FAO, Rome, Italy. Tsen, C.C., Hoover, WJ. and Farrell, E.P. (1973) Baking quality of triticale flours. Cereal Chemistry, 50, 16-26. Varughese, G., Pfeiffer, W.H. and Pena, R.J. (1996) Triticale: a successful alternative crop (part 2). Cereal Foods World, 41(7), 637-45. Weberpals, F. (1950) Fundamentals of rye bread production. Bakers' Digest, 24,84-7,93. {{page:364}} Index Page numbers m bold refer to figures, those m italiC refer to tables Acetic aCid 60,61,77 Bakmg nets 224 Activated dough development 32, 59 Balady bread 343 Beta-amylase 62 Additives m bread 46, 50 BIOlogical contammants m flour 312 toflour 315 Black spots m retarded doughs 174 Air Blast freezmg 164,258 flow m provers 128 Blendmg mcorporatlon 18, 19,89,281 mdough 276 offlours 314 velocity m ovens 120 Alcohol, see Ethanol of wheat 314 Alpha-amylase 62, 264 Blisters m retarded and frozen doughs 174 Bloomer bactenal 65 mouldmg 109 cereal 62, 65 fungal 63 Bondmg between protem chams mCBP 63 Bran 6,296 heat stability 64 Bran fmlshers 306 m straight dough bulk fermentatIOn 26 Branscan 321 maltogemc 66 Bread m triticale 334 Amencan rye 333 Alveograph 285, 326, 327 m Australia 208 Ambient part-baked 146 With cassava 339 see also Milton Keynes Process character 5 AMF Pan-O-Mat 219 compositIOn 15 Ammo aCid composItion 271 consumptIOn 16 Amylopectm 249, 264 eatmg quahty 14 Amylose 249 ennchment 15 Appearance of wheat 299 fault diagnOSIs by expert system 183 Ascorbic aCid 55,57,90,204,316 fault diagnOSIs by Retardmg AdVisor 192 mCBP 41,50 faults m Ash 263,268 bakmg 141 Aspiration 304 frozen dough 173 deflmtlon 328 retardmg 173 flavour 6, 14 Bactenal alpha-amylase 65 m France 198, 199 freezmg 256 effect on staling 253 freshness 4 Bactenal spOilage 242 gluten-free 337 Baguette 7,9, 10,40 use of 1eclthm 55 m Japan 208 mouldmg 109 With maize 339 part-baked 222 m the Middle East 198 Bakers yeast 69 multi-gram 335 Bakmg 120,209 m North Amenca 198 hamburger buns 221 nutrition 15 part-baked breads 224 quality 3 quahty assessment 11 retarded doughs 157 rye breads 333 wlthnce 339 With rye 330 triticale bread 334 {{page:348}} INDEX Bread cont'd Cooler sconng 11 deSign 143 softness 14 spITal 144 with sorghum 340 Cooling 121, 141,210 hamburger buns 221 spOilage 240 stalmg 240, 248 part-baked breads 225 texture 14 Cream yeast 70, 205 tnocale 334 Croissant types 3, 12,8, 199 frozen proved 170 m the UK 198,208 part-baked 222 recipes 230 unleavened 342 volume measurement 12 Cross-gram mouldmg 115 wheatless 337, 338 Crumb cell structure 13 Bread faults expert system 182 changes dunng bakmg 131 Breadmakmg m creatJon m New Zealand 204 CBP 39 South Afnca 204 straight dough bulk fennentatlOn 28 Breadmakmg processes 22,201 flnnness 251 Break system 306 effect of bactenal alpha-amylase 253 effect of fungal alpha-amylase 253 Breakdown of dough 280 Brown flour 309,318 gram 13 Bun dlvlder moulders 116 Crust 7 Butter m larmnated products 233, 234, 235 colour 13 cnspness 10, 137 fissures m retarded and frozen dough 172 CalcIUm propIOnate 60,61,76,244 fonnatlOn 133, 136 m part-baked breads 225 gelatIOn CalcIUm stearoyllactylate 53 crumb-type 135 Cassava bread 339 paste-type 135 Carbon dIOxide 1,21,28, 125, 134, 339 ragged breaks m retarded and frozen m frozen proved doughs 170 dough 173 m modified atmosphere packagmg 244, 246 stalmg 248 CBP-compauble mixers 82, 83 temperature 137 Cell creatIOn and control 21 Curling 112 Cereal alpha-amylase 62,65,300,316,337 chams 114 heat stablh ty 64 Cylmdncal rounders 102 m stfiught dough bulk fennentatlOn 26 Cysteme 55, 56, 203 ChapattJ 198,202,343 see also L-cysteme Cherrncal contarmnants m flour 311 Chorleywood Bread Process 35 bread faults expert system 182 Damsh pastry effects of atmosphenc pressure dunng frozen proved 170 rrnxmg part-baked 222 recipes 230 m New Zealand 204 productIOn of hamburger buns 218 DATA esters 50 reqUirements for wheat variety 203 effect on stalmg 254 role of energy durmg rrnxmg 36, 204 m high volume bread 51 CommerCial yeast producoon 73 m long-proof breads 52 Compressed yeast 69, 205 m UK white bread 51 Condensaoon spottmg m retarded dough 171 m wholemeal breads 52 CondltJonmg of wheat 304 m yeasted larmnated products 231 defmltlOn 328 DeactJvated yeasts 71 Comcal rounders 101 Dehydrated sours m rye bread 332 Contmuous rrnxers 82, 92 Defrostmg cycle m retarder-prover 178 Control of microbIOlogical spOilage 243 DefrostJng frozen dough 168 Controllmg flour quality and Degassmg flour brews 216 specificatIOn 313 Delayed salt 28 Depannmg Conveyonzed first provers 108 Conveyonzed oven 139 bread 140 {{page:349}} INDEX hamburger buns 221 Encapsulated yeast 70 part -baked breads Endosperm of wheat 66, 297 DJastatic malt flour 65 Enzyme activity dunng Dielectric heatmg 139 bakmg 133 retardmg 174 Distilled monoglycende 53 see also Glycerol monostearate Enzymes 62, 316 Dlsulphlde bonds 55 effect on stalmg 253 DIviders EqUlhbnum relative hunudlty 242, 245 Ethanol 244, 245 extrusIOn 98 model K 219 effect on stahng 255 two-stage 011 suction 96 Expert systems 170 vacuum 99 Extenslblhty 291 Extensograph 285, 325, 326 D!V1dmg 95, 206 m Austraha 207 ExtruSIOn bun d!V1der 219 hamburger buns 219 ExtruSIOn d!V1ders 98 m New Zealand 207 Doflow umt 218 Fallmg Number 26, 206 Dough see also Hagberg Fallmg Number breakdown 280 Fannograph 268,270,285,322,324,325 conditioners 45 Fat 46 cuttmg 9 mCBP 35,47 damage dunng d!V1dmg 96 lanunatmg 232 development 18, 19,20,202 meltmg pomt 47 elastiCity 20 m stratght dough fermentatIOn 27 extenslblhty 20 m wholemeal 48 formatIOn 274 m yeasted lanunated products 231 freezmg 149 Fmal mouldmg 115 hydratIOn 275 Fmal proof 209 nuxmg 18,81 First proof 103 mouldmg 108 First prover 105 stlckmess 20 conveyonzed 108 resistance to deformatIOn 20, 41 pallet m-feed 107 retardmg 149 pusher m-feed 107 rheology 20, 41, 283 Floor time 22 mADD 33 Flour mCBP 40 additives 315 temperature 25 anuno aCid compOSItion 271 mCBP 38 ash content 321 m no-time doughs 33 bIOlogical contammants 311 m sponge and dough 31 blendmg 314 m straight dough fermentatIOn 25 brew 216 m yeasted larrnnated products 233 mCBP 38 transfer systems 94 chenucal contanunants 311 unnuxmg 281 components 263 volume dunng retardmg 155 dressmg 305, 308 Dned pellet yeast 70 deflmtlon 328 Dned wheat gluten 26, 314 foreign bodies 311 mCBP 38 grade colour figure 321 Dutch green dough process 33, 104 mfestatlOn 312 mtllmg 296 ElastiCity 20, 289 mOIsture content 319,322 nutntlOnal additions 317 ElectrophoreSIS 302 EmulSifiers 50 packmg 309 m Austraha 206 protem content 307,314,319 mCBP 35 quahty 23, 313 m rapid processmg 34 effect on stalmg 254 rheology 323 III New Zealand 206 m stratght dough fermentatton 27 speCificatIOn 313 {{page:350}} INDEX Flour cont'd see also Dry wheat gluten Gluten-free bread 337 in sponge and dough 31 Glutenin 55,265,271,272,287 storage 309 in straight dough bulk fermentation 25 Glycerol monostearate effect on staling 254 taints 311 in yeasted laminated products 231 testing 319 Grading, see Scalping and Dusting treatment agents Granular yeast 70 for unleavened breads 344 Gristing of wheat 314 water absorption 322 in yeasted laminated products 230 definition 328 Folic acid 318 Guidelines for retarded dough production 159 Food safety and product protection 310 Form-fill sealing 245 Hagberg Falling Number 206, 300, 317, 323 Formulation, see Recipes see also Falling Number Four-piecing 114 Hamburger buns 59,214 Freezing baking 221 bread 256 using CBP 218 fermented doughs 161 cooling 221 laminated doughs 170 depanning 221 part-baked breads 145,226 flour recovery 220 proved doughs 169 formulations 215 rate 165, 166, 258 liquid brews and ferments 215 Frozen dough mixing 217 breadmaking processes 161 production rates 214 defrosting 168 proving 220 effect of storage temperature 163 seed application 221 recipe 161 Hardness in wheat 301 volume losses 161 Hemicellulase 66, 316, 317 yeast level 161 High speed mixers 82, 85 Frozen yeast 70 High velocity convection 140 Functional ingredients 45 Horizontal mixers 87 Functions of mixing 81 Hydration 275 Functions of the breadmaking process 18 Fungal alpha-amylase 63,317 Image analysis 12 inCBP 63 Improvers effect on staling 253 in part-baked breads 224 heat stability 64 in rapid processing 34 in straight dough bulk fermentation 26 in rye bread 333 in sponge and dough 31 Gas Inactivated yeasts 71 production 20 Indexing conveyors 106 inCBP 75 Infestation in flour 312 in frozen dough 164 Infrared radiation 140, 247 in straight dough fermentation 27 Instant yeast 70, 205 retention 21, 263 Intermediate proof 103,207 in straight dough fermentation 27 with frozen doughs 164 Germ 6,297 Irradiation 247 Glass transition temperature 167, 257 Glassy state 258 Kneading 18, 19,262 Gliadin 55,265,271,272,287 action in Wendal mixer 87 Gloss formation 135 Knock-back 24, 26, 28 Gluten 3, 263, 265 Knowledge-based systems 180 development 18,277 elasticity 289 L-Cysteine 55, 59 matrix 282 Laminated products, see Croissant, Danish oxidation by soya flour 50 pastry structure 287 viscosity 290 Laminating fat 232, 236 {{page:351}} INDEX LaIIllnatJon 237 Oven break 13, 136, 137 Leclthms 54 OXldlzmg agents m the USA 59 m yeasted laIIIlnated products 231 Oxygen 21,282 Life cycle costs 147 Lipids 263,266 Packagmg 211 LiqUId brews 215 form-fill 245 Loaf core temperature 132 vacuum 246 Low-grade flour 306, 308 Packmg 210 deflmtlon 328 Pallet m-feed systems 107 Low speed IIIlxers 82, 90 Panmng 208 Pans 208 Mrullard reactIOns 7, 134 Papadruns 344 Maize bread 339 Part-baked breads 222 Malt bread 309 bake-off 226 Malt flour 316,337 bakmg 224 m strrught dough fermentatJon 27 coohng 225 Malted barley m bread 336 depanmng 225 Malted grrun flours 319 freezmg 145,226 Maltogemc runylase 66 manufacture 223 Manufacture of part-baked breads 223 provmg 224 Mechamcal dough development 22 storage 225 Microbiological spOIlage of bread 240 uses 223 Microwave radiatIOn 139,247 Part -baked processes 145 Mill screenroom 303 runblent 146 Milton Keynes Process 146, 227 frozen 145 Mixers Partial vacuum m CBP 40 CBP-compatJble 39, 82 Patent flour 308 effects of pressure m CBP 40, 84 deflmtJon 328 types 82 Pea fibre m bread 336 Mlxmg 18,19 Pearlmg of wheat 313 control of IIIlxer headspace atmosphere 35, Pentosans 66,263,265,270,322 mrye 331 40,41,49,58,83 hrunburger buns 217 effect on stahng 254 lammated products 234 pH m brews 216,217 role of energy m CBP 36, 37 Pizza yeasts 71 rye doughs 332 Pocket -type prover 104 Model K dlYlder 219 PotassIUm sorbate Modified atmosphere packagmg 244 m part-baked breads 225 Mould mhlbltors 60 Preservatlves 60,61,243 m part-baked breads 225 Process econOIIllcs 146 Mould spOIlage 240, 241 Processmg frozen doughs 163 Mouldmg 108, 207 Proof determmatlOn by Retardmg cross-grrun 115 AdVisor 191 MultJ-gram breads 335 ProplOmc aCId 76, 244 Protease 317 Protem Naan 9,343 bondmg 56, 288 Nitrogen 21, 170 content m North Amenca flour 307,314,319 sponge and dough 30, 203 wheat 301 Protemases 67 Oats m bread 336 Provers carner 130 Obhque aXIs fork IIIlxer 90, 91 Off-odours m wheat 299 spiral 130 Oil suctJon divider 96 Provmg 120,124 Oven frozen doughs 168 hamburger buns 220 conveyonzed 139 deSign 138 part -baked breads 224 {{page:352}} INDEX PrOVIng cont'd reCIprocatIng 103 retarded doughs 157 RoundIng 99 see also IntennedIate proof, FInal proof RoundIng belts 102 Psychometry 123 Rye bread 309, 330 PsychrometIc chart 123 AInencan 333 PumpernIckel bread 331 bakIng 333 Punflers 305, 306 dehydrated sours 332 Pusher In-feed systems 107 doughmakIng 332 Improvers 333 keepIng quahtIes 334 RadIO frequency heatIng 139 recIpe 332 RapId processIng methods 22 starter 331 ReCIpes for use of sour dough 331 Balady 343 cassava bread 339 Salt 7,78,206 chapattI 343 frozen dough 161 effect on yeast 78 hamburger buns 215 Samphng of wheat dehvenes 298 maIze bread 339 ScalpIng 305, 306 Naan 343 Scratch system 305, 306 ScreenIngs In wheat 299 Papadams 344 defInlt!on 328 retardIng 151 nce bread 339 Seed apphcatlOns 221 Self-nusIng flour 319 rye bread 332 sorghum bread 340,341 SheetIng 111 sponge and dough 30 Shelf hfe of bread straight dough bulk fennentatIon 24, effect of ethanol 244 TortIlla 344 of rye bread 334 UK whIte bread 215 Shock freeZIng 226 yeasted larnInated products 229 SkInnIng In retarded doughs 151, 171, 172 ReCIprocatIng rounders 103 ShcIng 210 ReductIOn system 305, 307 SodIUm Stearoyl-2-Lactylate 52 Refngerated proVIng 129 effect on stahng 254 RefngeratlOn pnnclples 175 In yeasted lrumnated products 231 SorbIC aCId 60, 61 RelatIve humIdIty defInItIon 123 Sorghum bread 340, 341 In retardIng 152 Sour dough In rye bread 331 ReSIstance to defonnatIon 20 Soya flour 49 Retarder constructIon 176 as a flour bleachIng agent 49 gluten OXIdatIon 50 Retarder-provers constructIOn 176, 177 InCBP 49 control by RetardIng AdVIsor 193 In straight dough fennentatIon 27 RetardIng 149 SpeCIfIC humIdIty 123 effect of storage temperature 153 SpIral nuxers 88 effect of storage tIme 153, 155, 156 WIth no-tIme doughs 33 effect of yeast level 151, 159 SpOIlage by pIzza doughs 160 bactena 242 productIOn gUldehnes 159 mould 240 recIpes 151 yeasts 243 sUltablhty of processes 150 Sponge effect of pH 29 RetardIng AdVIsor 188 RIce bread 339 In retardIng 150 Role of energy dunng nuXIng 36 role of 7,29 Roles of the sponge 29 temperature 31, Roll plants 118 Sponge and dough 22, 29 Rope 76, 240, 242, 335 In North Amenca 30, 203 InUK 30 Rounders comcal 101 StalIng 240, 248 cylIndncal 102 role of gluten 251 {{page:353}} INDEX Vltarmn C, see Ascorbic aCid role of starch 248 StalIng mhlbltors 252 Volume losses emulsifiers 254 m retarded and frozen doughs 173 enzymes 253 ethanol 255 Water 205 pentosans 254 absorptIOn 268, 269, 322 sugars 256 levelm Starch 263,264 CBP 41, damage 270,307,322 straight dough bulk fermentatIOn 26 gelahmzatlOn 133,249 redlstnbutlon m stalmg 252 retrogradatIOn 250 role In dough formatIOn 6 Stlckmess of dough 20 splItter 221 Straight dough bulk fermentation 22 24 Water-soluble proteins 263,265,267 dough temperature 25 ' Waxy patches m retarded doughs 171, 173 effect of fermentatIOn time 26 Weight loss dunng recipes 24 bakmg 134 m retardmg 150 coohng 143 Sugar 78 processmg 146 effect on stalIng 256 retardmg 152, 153 effect on yeast 78 Wenda! mixers 86 level m yeasted lammated products 232 Wheat appearance 299 Tamts blendmg 314 m flour 3tl m Canada 198 m wheat 299 cereal alpha-amylase 300 Temperature condltlomng 304 changes dunng dehvery 298 bakmg 121 denSity 300 coolIng 121, 142 endosperm 66 defrostmg frozen dough 169 gluten content 300 freezmg 166, 167 gluten protem 270 provmg 121, 127, 169 gram 297 retardmg 154 gnstmg 314 vacuum coolIng 144 Hagberg Fallmg Number 300 dew pomt 123 hardness 301 dry bulb 123 Impuntles 299 wet bulb 123 separatIOn 303 Texture profile analysIs 14 off-odours 299 Tortillas 344 pearlmg 313 Total tltratable aCidity (TTA) m brews 216 protem content 301 217 ' screemngs 299 Trammg 212 storage 302 Tnhcale 334 tamts 299 alpha-amylase activity 334 testing 299 bakmg 334 m the USA 198 rmllmg 334 Wheatless breads 337, 338 Twm-arm rmxers 91 White spots 173 Twm spiral rmxers 82, 85 effect of yeast 171 m frozen dough 170 UltravIOlet lITadiatlon 247 m retarded dough 170 Unleavened bread 342 Wholemeal Unrmxmg of dough 281 bread compositIOn 15 effect of fat m bread 48 Vacuum flour 6,309, 318 coolmg 144,228,337 mould 241 Wishbone mixer 90 dividers 99 packaging 246 Work mput m the CBP 36,204 Vmegar, see Acetic aCid Wrappmg 248 {{page:354}} INDEX Yeast 69,205 in laminated products activity during proof 126 in liquid brews 215 activity during baking 132 inactivated 71 in theCBP 75 instant 70, 205 cell biology 71 level 24 commercial production 73 in frozen dough 161 in retarded dough 151,153 compressed 69,205 in straight dough bulk fermentation 24 cream 70, 205 deactivated 71 in yeasted laminated products 232 dried pellet 70 pizza 71 encapsulated 70 storage stability 76 effects of acidity or alkalinity 76 Yeasted laminated products 229 effects of mould and rope inhibitors 76 addition of fat 231 effect of salt 79 dough mixing 234 effects of spices 77 dough temperature 233 effect of sugar 79 use of emulsifiers 231 effect on white spots in retarded dough 172 flour quality 230 extracts 71 formulations 229 fermentation 20 laminating fat 232, 236 fermentative 243 lamination 237 filamentous 243 sugar level 232 frozen 70 yeast levels 232 in frozen dough 77 Z-blade mixers 87 granular 70
