---
book: "On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen"
book_slug: "mcgee-on-food-and-cooking"
author: "Harold McGee"
lang: "en"
relevance: "high"
chapter: "Chapter 6: A Survey of Common Vegetables"
heading: "Potatoes"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 6: A Survey of Common Vegetables", "Potatoes"]
order: 238
source_page: null
tokens_est: 2702
---

# Potatoes

Potatoes

There are more than 200 species of potato, relatives of the tomato, chilli, and tobacco that are indigenous to moist, cool regions of Central and South America. Some were cultivated 8,000 years ago. Spanish explorers brought one species, Solanum tuberosum, from Peru or Colombia to Europe around 1570. Because it was hardy and easy to grow, the potato was inexpensive and the poor were its principal consumers. (An Irish peasant ate 5-10 pounds per day at the time of the 1845 blight.) It now leads all other vegetables in worldwide production. More potatoes are consumed in the United States than any other vegetable, around a third of a pound/150 gm per person per day.

The potato is a tuber, the tip of an underground stem that swells with stored starch and water and bears primordial buds, the "eyes," that generate the stem and roots of a new plant. It is sometimes a little sweet, with a slight but characteristic bitterness, and has a mild earthy flavor from a compound (a pyrazine) produced by soil microbes, but also apparently within the tuber itself.

Harvest and Storage True "new" potatoes are immature tubers, harvested from green vines during the late spring and throughout the summer. They are moist and sweet, relatively low in starch, and perishable. Mature potatoes are harvested in the fall. The vines are killed by cutting or drying, and the tubers are left in the soil for several weeks to "cure" and toughen their skin. Potatoes can be stored in the dark for months, during which their flavor intensifies; slow enzyme action generates fatty, fruity, and flowery notes from cell-membrane lipids. The ideal storage temperature is 45-50ºF/7-10ºC. At warmer temperatures they may sprout or decay, and at colder temperatures their metabolism shifts in a complicated way that results in the breakdown of some starch to sugars. Makers of potato chips must "recondition" cold-stored potatoes at room temperature for several weeks to reduce their levels of glucose and fructose, which otherwise cause the chips to brown too rapidly and develop a bitter taste. Internal black spots in potatoes are essentially bruises, formed when an impact during handling damages cells and causes the browning enzymes to create dark complexes of the amino acid tyrosine (alkaloid formation and therefore bitterness often rise also).

Nutritional Qualities Potatoes are a good source of energy and vitamin C. Yellow-fleshed varieties owe their color to fat-soluble carotenoids (lutein, zeaxanthin), purple and blue ones to water-soluble and antioxidant anthocyanins. Potatoes are notable for containing significant levels of the toxic alkaloids solanine and chaconine, a hint of whose bitterness is part of their true flavor. Most commercial varieties contain 2 to 15 milligrams of solanine and chaconine per quarter-pound (100 grams) of potato. Progressively higher levels result in a distinctly bitter taste, a burning sensation in the throat, digestive and neurological problems, and even death. Stressful growing conditions and exposure to light can double or triple the normal levels. Because light also induces chlorophyll formation, a green cast to the surface is a sign of abnormally high alkaloid levels. Greened potatoes should either be peeled deeply or discarded, and strongly bitter potatoes should not be eaten.

Cooking Types and Behavior There are two general cooking categories of potato, called the "mealy" and the "waxy" for their textures when cooked. Mealy types (russets, blue and purple varieties, Russian and banana fingerlings) concentrate more dry starch in their cells, so they're denser than waxy types. When cooked, the cells tend to swell and separate from each other, producing a fine, dry, fluffy texture that works well in fried potatoes and in baked and mashed potatoes, which are moistened with butter or cream. In waxy types (true new potatoes and common U.S. red-and white-skinned varieties), neighboring cells cohere even when cooked, which gives them a solid, dense, moist texture, and holds them together in intact pieces for gratins, potato cakes, and salads. Both types can be made firmer and more coherent, less prone to the "sloughing" of outer layers when boiled, by treating them to the low-temperature precooking that strengthens cell walls (p. 283).

Cooked potatoes sometimes develop a large internal region of bluish-gray discoloration. This "after-cooking darkening" is caused by the combination of iron ions, a phenolic substance (chlorogenic acid), and oxygen, which react to form a pigmented complex. This problem can be minimized in boiled potatoes by making the pH of the water distinctly acidic with cream of tartar or lemon juice after the potatoes are half-cooked.

The flavor of boiled potatoes is dominated by the intensified earthy and fatty, fruity, and flowery notes of the raw tuber. Baked potatoes develop another layer of flavor from the browning reactions (p.777), including malty and "sweet" aromas (methylbutanal, methional). Leftover potatoes often suffer from a stale, cardboard-like flavor that develops over several days in the refrigerator, but within a few hours if the potatoes are kept hot for prolonged service. It turns out that the aromatic fragments of membrane lipids are temporarily stabilized by the tuber's antioxidant vitamin C; but with time the vitamin C is used up and the fragments become oxidized to a series of less pleasant aldehydes.

Potatoes are prepared in many ways, and used as an ingredient in many dishes. Here are brief notes on a few starring roles.

Mashed and Pureed Potatoes There are many different styles of mashed potatoes, but all of them involve cooking the potatoes whole or in pieces, crushing them to a more or less fine particle size, and lubricating and enriching the particles with a combination of water and fat, usually in the form of butter and milk or cream. Some luxurious versions may be almost as much butter as potato, or include eggs or egg yolks. Mealy types fall apart into individual cells and small aggregates, so they offer a large surface area for coating by the added ingredients, and readily produce a fine, creamy consistency. Waxy potatoes require more mashing to obtain a smooth texture, exude more gelated starch, and don't absorb enrichment as easily. The classic French pommes purées, pureed potatoes, are made from waxy potatoes, pieces of which are pushed through a fine sieve or food mill and then worked hard - to the point of having what an eminent French cookbook writer, Mme Ste-Ange, called a "dead arm" - first alone and then with butter, to incorporate air and obtain the lightness of whipped cream. American recipes take a more gentle approach, sieving mealy varieties and carefully stirring in liquid and fat to avoid excessive cell damage, starch release, and glueyness.

Fried Potatoes Fried potatoes are some of the world's favorite foods. Deep-fried potato sticks and slices and the technique of double-frying were all well known in Europe by the middle of the 19th century, and in England were attributed mainly to the French: hence the term "French fry" for what the French simply call fried potatoes ( pommes frites ). These products happily turned out to be among the few foods whose quality need not be compromised by mass production. Of course they're rich: the frying oil in which they're immersed coats their surface and is drawn into the tiny pores created when the surfac dries out. The proportion of oil to potato depends on the surface area. Chips, which are almost all surface, average about 35% oil, while thick fries are more like 10-15%.

French Fries "French fries" may first have been made in significant quantities by Parisian street vendors early in the 19th century. They are potato sticks cut with a square cross section, 5-10 mm on a side, deep-fried in oil, with a crisp gold exterior and a moist interior that's fluffy if the potatoes are high-starch russets, creamy otherwise. Simple quick frying doesn't work very well; it gives a thin, delicate crust that's quickly softened by the interior's moisture. A crisp crust requires an initial period of gentle frying, so that starch in the surface cells has time to dissolve from the granules and reinforce and glue together the outer cell walls into a thicker, more robust layer. Good fries can be made by starting the potato strips in relatively cool oil, 250-325ºF/120-163ºC, cooking for 8-10 minutes, then raising the oil temperature to 350-375ºF/175-190ºC and cooking for 3-4 minutes to brown and crisp the outside. The most efficient production method is to pre-fry all the potato strips at the lower temperature ahead of time, set them aside at room temperature, and then do the brief high-temperature frying at the last minute.

Potato Chips Potato chips are essentially french fries that are all crust and no interior. The potatoes are cut into thin cross sections around 1.5 mm thick, the equivalent of just 10-12 potato cells, then deep-fried until dry and crisp. There are two basic ways of frying chips, and they produce two different textures. Cooking at a fairly constant and high oil temperature, around 350ºF/175ºC, heats the slices so rapidly that the starch granules and cell walls have little chance to absorb any moisture before they're desiccated and done, in 3-4 minutes. The texture is therefore delicately crisp and fine-grained. Most packaged chips have this texture because they're made in a continuous processor whose oil temperature stays high. On the other hand, cooking at an initially low and slowly increasing temperature, beginning around 250ºF/120ºC and reaching 350ºF/175ºC in 8-10 minutes, gives the starch granules time to absorb water, exude dissolved starch into the potato cell walls, and reinforce and glue them together. The result is a much harder, crunchier chip. This is the texture created by "kettle frying," or cooking the slices by the batch in a vessel like an ordinary pot. The temperature of the preheated kettle drops immediately when a batch of cold potatoes is dumped in, so the potatoes cook in oil whose temperature starts low and rises slowly as the potatoes' moisture is cooked out and the heater catches up.

Soufflée Potatoes Soufflée potatoes are a kind of hybrid French fry-chip in which the potato slices puff up into delicate brown balloons. They are made by cutting potato slices around 3 mm ( 1 / 8 in) thick, and deep-frying them at a moderate temperature, 350ºF/175ºC, until their surfaces become leathery and just begin to brown. The slices are cooled, then fried a second time at a high temperature, around 380ºF/195ºC. Now when the interior moisture is heated to the boil and vaporized, the stiffened surfaces resist the pressure, and the vapor pushes the two surfaces apart, leaving a hollow center.
