---
book: "On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen"
book_slug: "mcgee-on-food-and-cooking"
author: "Harold McGee"
lang: "en"
relevance: "high"
chapter: "Chapter 6: A Survey of Common Vegetables"
heading: "The Nightshade Family: Tomato, Capsicums, Eggplant, and Others"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 6: A Survey of Common Vegetables", "The Nightshade Family: Tomato, Capsicums, Eggplant, and Others"]
order: 265
source_page: null
tokens_est: 3182
---

# The Nightshade Family: Tomato, Capsicums, Eggplant, and Others

The Nightshade Family: Tomato, Capsicums, Eggplant, and Others

This remarkable plant family includes several of the world's most popular vegetables as well as tobacco and deadly nightshade; in fact it was the tomato's resemblance to nightshade that slowed its acceptance in Europe. Members of the nightshade family share the habit of stock-piling chemical defenses, usually bitter alkaloids. Many generations of selection and breeding have reduced these defenses in most edible nightshade fruits, though their leaves are often still toxic. There's one nightshade defense that humans have fallen in love with: the pungent capsaicins of the chilli "peppers." Chillis are the most popular spice in the world; their pungency is discussed in chapter 8. In this section I'll describe the milder capsicums that are eaten as vegetables.

Tomatoes Tomatoes started out as small, bitter berries growing on bushes in the west coast deserts of South America. Today, after their domestication in Mexico (their name comes from the Aztec term for "plump fruit," tomatl ), and a period of European suspicion that lasted into the 19th century, they're eaten all over the world in a great variety of sizes, shapes, and carotenoid-painted colors. In the United States they're second in vegetable popularity only to the potato, a starchy staple.

What accounts for their great appeal? And why are these sweet-tart fruits treated as a vegetable? I think that the answers lie in their unique flavor. In addition to a relatively low sugar content for a fruit (3%), similar to that of cabbage and brussels sprouts, ripe tomatoes have an unusually large amount of savory glutamic acid (as much as 0.3% of their weight), as well as aromatic sulfur compounds. Glutamic acid and sulfur aromas are more common in meats than fruits, and so predispose them to complement the flavor of meats, even to replace that flavor, and certainly to add depth and complexity to sauces and other mixed preparations. (This may also be why although many rotten fruits smell pleasantly fermented, rotten tomatoes are absolutely foul!) In any case, tomatoes are a good thing to like. They're rich in vitamin C, and the standard red varieties give us an excellent dose of the antioxidant carotenoid lycopene, which is especially concentrated in tomato paste and ketchup.

Vegetables in the Nightshade Family

Tomato Anatomy and Flavor Aside from the relatively dry paste varieties, most tomatoes have four different kinds of tissue: a thin, tough cuticle, or skin, which is sometimes removed; the outer fruit wall; the central pith; and a semiliquid jelly and juice surrounding the seeds. The wall tissue contains most of the sugars and amino acids, while the concentration of acid in the jelly and juice is double that of the wall. And most of the aroma compounds are found in the cuticle and wall. The flavor of a tomato slice thus depends on the relative proportions of these tissues. Many cooks prepare tomatoes for cooking by first removing the skin, seedy jelly, and juice. This practice makes the tomato flesh more refined and less watery, but it changes the flavor balance in favor of sweetness, and sacrifices aroma. The tomato's citric and malic acids aren't volatile and don't cook away, so acidity and some aroma can be restored by cooking the skins, jelly, and juice together until much of the liquid has evaporated, then straining the remainder into the cooking tomato flesh. As cooks have long known and flavor chemists have verified, the overall flavor of tomatoes can be intensified by the addition of both sugar and acidity.

Tomatoes that are allowed to ripen fully on the vine accumulate more sugar, acid, and aroma compounds, and have the fullest flavor. An important element of ripe-tomato flavor is provided by the aroma compound furaneol, which resembles sweet-savory caramel (it also contributes to the flavors of ripe strawberries and pineapples). Most supermarket tomatoes are picked and shipped while still green and artificially stimulated to redden by treatment with ethylene gas (p. 351), so they have little ripe-fruit flavor, and in fact have become a byword for flavorless produce. However, parts of Europe and Latin America prefer to make salads with less fruity, more vegetable-like mature green tomatoes, and people in many regions cook (or pickle) and enjoy green tomatoes for their own kind of savoriness. And in rural Peru, the prized varieties of both tomato and tomatillo are frankly bitter.

Cooked Tomatoes When fresh tomatoes are cooked down to make a thick sauce, they gain some flavors - notably rose-and violet-like fragments of the carotenoid pigments - but they lose the fresh "green" notes provided by unstable fragments of fatty acids and by a particular sulfur compound (a thiazole). Because tomato leaves have a pronounced fresh-tomato aroma thanks to their leaf enzymes (p. 273) and prominent aromatic oil glands, some cooks add a few leaves to a tomato sauce toward the end of the cooking, to restore its fresh notes. Tomato leaves have long been considered potentially toxic because they contain a defensive alkaloid, tomatine, but recent research has found that tomatine binds tightly to cholesterol molecules in our digestive system, so that the body absorbs neither the alkaloid nor its bound partner. It thus reduces our net intake of cholesterol! (Green tomatoes also contain tomatine and have the same effect.) It's fine, then, to freshen the flavor of tomato sauces with the leaves.

Tomato anatomy. The fruit wall is especially rich in sugars, amino acids, and aroma molecules, the jelly in sugarbalancing acids.

Fresh tomatoes readily cook down to a smooth puree, but many canned tomatoes don't. Canners frequently add calcium salts to firm the cell walls and keep the pieces intact, and this can interfere with their disintegration during cooking. If you want to make a fine-textured dish from canned tomatoes, check the labels and buy a brand that doesn't list calcium among its ingredients.

Storage Tomatoes came originally from a warm climate, and should be stored at room temperature. Their fresh flavor readily suffers from refrigeration. Tomatoes at the mature-green stage are especially sensitive to chilling at temperatures below about 55ºF/13ºC, and suffer damage to their membranes that results in minimal flavor development, blotchy coloration, and a soft, mealy texture when they're brought back to room temperature. Fully ripe tomatoes are less sensitive, but lose flavor due to the loss of flavor-producing enzyme activity. Some of this activity can come back, so refrigerated tomatoes should be allowed to recover at room temperature for a day or two before eating.

The "tree tomato" is the vaguely tomato-like fruit of a woody plant in the nightshade family. It comes in red and yellow types and has a tough peel and bland flavor.

Tomatillos Tomatillos are the fruits of Physalis ixocarpa, a tomato relative that in fact was cultivated before the tomato in Mexico and Guatemala, to whose cool highlands it is better adapted. The tomatillo fruit is smaller than a standard tomato but similar in structure, and is borne on the plant enclosed in a papery husk. Its skin is thick and tough, sticky with a water-soluble secretion (the plant's species name, ixocarpa, means "sticky fruit"), that helps it keep well for several weeks. The tomatillo remains green when ripe and has a tart but otherwise mild, green flavor, a relatively firm and dry texture. It's usually cooked and/or pureed into sauces, with other ingredients adding depth or strength of flavor. A related species, P. philadelphica, provides an esteemed purple version called miltomate.

Capsicums or Sweet Peppers Capsicums, like tomatoes, are fruits of the New World that conquered the Old. They were domesticated in South America, and are now a defining element of the cuisines of Mexico, Spain, Hungary, and many countries in Asia (the countries with the highest per capita consumption are Mexico and Korea). This triumph is due largely to the defensive chemical capsaicin, which activates pain and heat receptors in our mouths, and which many human cultures have perversely come to love. This spicy aspect of the chillis is what inspired Columbus to call them peppers, though they're not at all related to true black pepper. ( Chilli was the Aztec term.) For chillis as spices, see chapter 8.

Capsicums are essentially hollow berries, with a relatively thin, crisp wall of storage cells (spice types have been selected for very thin, easily dried fruits; vegetable types such as the pimiento have been bred for meatier walls). There are five domesticated species in the chilli genus Capsicum, with most vegetable types coming from C. annuum. Many varieties have been developed that are mild enough to be eaten as vegetables rather than condiments, and with a range of colors, shapes, sweetnesses, and aromas. Capsicums ripen to shades of yellow, brown, purple, or red, depending on the mix of pigments (purple comes from anthocyanins, brown from the combination of red carotenoids and green chlorophyll), but all can be picked and eaten green. The familiar green bell pepper has a strong, distinctive aroma thanks to a particular compound (isobutyl methoxypyrazine) carried in oil droplets within its cells; the very same compound occasionally pops up in cabernet sauvignon and sauvignon blanc wines and gives them a usually unwelcome green-vegetable note. Green fruits and mature yellow varieties are also rich in the carotenoid lutein, which helps prevent oxidative damage in the eye (p. 256). In red varieties, both lutein and the green aroma disappear during ripening along with chlorophyll, and other carotenoid pigments accumulate, the main ones being capsanthin, capsorubin, as well as beta-carotene, the precursor of vitamin A. Mature red capsicums are among the richest carotenoid sources we have; paprika powder may be more than 1% pigment by weight. They're also rich in vitamin C. And thanks to their content of cell-wall pectins, both fresh and rehydrated dried capsicums develop a thick, smooth consistency when cooked and pureed for a soup or sauce.

Eggplants, or Aubergines Eggplants are the only major vegetable in the nightshade family that came from the Old World. An early ancestor may have floated from Africa to India or Southeast Asia, where it was domesticated, and where small, bitter varieties are still appreciated as a condiment. Arab traders brought it to Spain and north Africa in the Middle Ages, and it was eaten in Italy in the 15th century, in France by the 18th. (The etymology of aubergine mirrors this history; it comes via Spanish and Arabic from the Sanskrit name.) Thanks to its tropical origins, the eggplant doesn't keep well in the refrigerator; internal chilling damage leads to browning and off-flavors in a few days.

There are many varieties of eggplant, white-and orange-and purple-skinned, pea-and cucumber-and melon-sized, very mild and intensely bitter. Most market types are colored with purple anthocyanins, while a different species ( S. aethiopicum ) provides the orange carotenoid types. All eggplants have a spongy interior, with many tiny air pockets between cells. When cooked, the air pockets collapse and the flesh consolidates into a fine-textured mass, sometimes creamy (most Asian varieties) and sometimes meaty (most European varieties) depending on the variety, maturity, and preparation. In baked casseroles - the Greek moussaka and Italian eggplant parmigiana - eggplant slices retain some structure; in the Middle Eastern dip baba ghanoush, grilled pureed eggplant provides the smooth, melting body that carries the flavors of sesame paste, lemon juice, and garlic.

Eggplant's spongy structure has two notable consequences for the cook. One is that eggplants shrink down to a relatively small volume when cooked. The other is that when fried, raw eggplant pieces soak up oil, leaving little on the pan for lubrication and making the vegetable very rich. In some preparations - such as the famous Arab dish Imam bayaldi, "the priest fainted," in which halved eggplants are stuffed and baked in copious olive oil - this richness is desired and maximized. Otherwise, the absorptiveness of eggplant can be reduced by collapsing its spongy structure before frying. This is accomplished by precooking it - microwaving works well - or by salting slices to draw out moisture from the cells and into the air pockets. Salting is often recommended as a way to remove the bitterness sometimes found in older eggplants grown in dry conditions, but it probably just reduces our perception of the alkaloids (p. 640); the bulk of the cell fluids remains in the cells.
