---
book: "On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen"
book_slug: "mcgee-on-food-and-cooking"
author: "Harold McGee"
lang: "en"
relevance: "high"
chapter: "Chapter 9: Seeds: Grains, Legumes, and Nuts"
heading: "Rice"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 9: Seeds: Grains, Legumes, and Nuts", "Rice"]
order: 365
source_page: null
tokens_est: 4431
---

# Rice

Rice

Rice is the principal food for about half of the world's population, and in such countries as Bangladesh and Cambodia provides nearly three-quarters of the daily energy intake. Oryza sativa is a native of the tropical and semitropical Indian subcontinent, northern Indochina, and southern China, and was probably domesticated in several places independently, the short-grain types around 7000 BCE in the Yangtze River valley of south-central China, and long-grain types in Southeast Asia somewhat later. A sister species with a distinctive flavor and red bran, Oryza glaberrima, has been grown in west Africa for at least 1,500 years.

Rice found its way from Asia to Europe via Persia, where the Arabs learned to grow and cook it. The Moors first grew large quantities in Spain in the 8th century, then somewhat later in Sicily. The valley of the Po River and the Lombardy plain in northern Italy, the home of risotto, first produced rice in the 15th century. The Spanish and Portuguese introduced rice throughout the Americas in the 16th and 17th centuries. South Carolina was the location of the first commercial American planting in 1685, where the rice-growing expertise of African slaves was important; today most U.S. rice comes from Arkansas and the lower Mississippi region, Texas, and California.

Kinds of Rice There are thought to be more than 100,000 distinct varieties of rice throughout the world. They all fall into one of two traditionally recognized subspecies of Oryza sativa. Indica rices are generally grown in lowland tropics and subtropics, accumulate a large amount of amylose starch, and produce a long, firm grain. Japonica rices, with upland varieties that do well both in the tropics (Indonesian and Filipino types sometimes known as javanicas ) and in temperate climates (Japan, Korea, Italy, and California), accumulate substantially less amylose starch than the indicas, and produce a shorter, stickier grain. There are also varieties that are intermediate between indica and japonica. Generally, the higher the amylose content in a rice variety, the more organized and stable the starch granules, and so the more water, heat, and time it takes to cook the grains.

Most rice is milled to remove the bran and most of the germ, and then "polished" with fine wire brushes to grind away the aleurone layer and its oil and enzymes. The result is a very stable refined grain that keeps well for months.

Common categories of rice include the following:

Long-grain rice has an elongated shape, its length four to five times its width. Thanks to its relatively high proportion of amylose (22%), it tends to require the largest proportion of water to rice (1.7 to 1 by weight, 1.4 to 1 by volume), and to produce separate springy grains that become firm as they cool, and distinctly hard if chilled. Most Chinese and Indian rices are long-grain indicas, as is most of the rice sold in the United States.

Medium-grain rice is two to three times longer than it is wide, contains less amylose (15-17%) than long-grain rice and requires less water, and develops tender grains that cling to each other. Italian risotto rices and Spanish paella rices are medium-grain japonicas.

Short-grain rice is only slightly longer than it is wide, and otherwise similar to medium-grain rice. Short-and medium-grain japonicas are the preferred types in north China, Japan, and Korea. They're ideal for sushi because they cling together in small masses and remain tender even when served at room temperature.

Sticky rice, also called waxy, glutinous, or sweet rice, is a short-grain type whose starch is practically all amylopectin. It requires the least water (1 to 1 by weight, 0.8 to 1 by volume) and becomes very clingy and readily disintegrates when cooked (it's often soaked and then steamed, not boiled). Despite its names, it contains no gluten and isn't sweet, though it's often used to make sweet dishes in Asia. It's the standard rice in Laos and northern Thailand.

Aromatic rices are a distinctive group of mainly long-and medium-grain varieties that accumulate unusually high concentrations of volatile compounds. Indian and Pakistani basmati (Urdu for "fragrant," accent on the first syllable), Thai jasmine (an unusual long-grain but low-amylose type), and U.S. Della are well-known aromatic rices.

Pigmented rices have bran layers that are rich in anthocyanin pigments. Red and purple-black colors are the most common. The bran may be left intact, or partly milled away so that only traces of color are left.

Brown Rice Brown rice is unmilled, its bran, germ, and aleurone layers intact. Any kind of rice, whether long-grain, short-grain, or aromatic, may be sold in its brown form. It takes two to three times longer to cook than the milled version of the same variety, and has a chewy texture and a rich aroma, often described as nutty. Thanks to the oil in its bran and germ, it's more susceptible to staling than polished rice, and is best stored in the refrigerator.

Parboiled or Converted Rice For more than 2,000 years, rice producers in India and Pakistan have parboiled nonaromatic varieties before they remove the hull and mill them to white rice. They steep the freshly harvested grain in water, boil or steam it, and then dry it again before hulling and milling. This precooking brings several advantages. It improves the nutritional quality of the milled grain by causing vitamins in the bran and germ to diffuse into the endosperm, and causing the aleurone layer to adhere to the grain. Precooking the starch also hardens the grain and makes its surface less sticky, so when cooked again, parboiled rice produces separate firm intact grains. Parboiled rice also has a distinctive nutty flavor; the soaking activates enzymes that generate sugars and amino acids that then participate in browning reactions during drying; and partial breakdown of lignin in the attached hull provides vanillin and related compounds. Parboiled rice takes longer to cook than ordinary white rice, a third to half again the time, and its texture is so firm that it can seem coarse.

Different forms of rice. Brown rice includes the outer fruit and seed coats that make up the bran, and the embryo and oil-and enzyme-rich aleurone layer. Polished rice is the central mass of endosperm cells, freed from all other parts of the grain; it's mainly starch and protein. Wild rice is the whole grain of a North American grass; it is heated to dry it out and develop flavor, and this processing gives its endosperm a distinctive glassy appearance.

Quick-Cooking Rice Quick-cooking rice is manufactured by cooking white, brown, or parboiled rice, thus disrupting its cell walls and gelating its starch, then fissuring the grain in order to speed the infiltration of hot water when the consumer cooks it, and finally drying it. The fissuring may be accomplished with dry heat, rolling, microwave treatments, or freeze-drying.

Rice Flavor The flavor of rice depends on the variety and the degree to which it is milled. The outer portions of the rice grain contain more free amino acids, sugars, and minerals, and proportionally less starch. The more a rice kernel is milled, and so the more of its surface is removed, the less flavor and the higher proportion of starch it contains.

The aroma of standard white rices has green, mushroomy, cucumber-like, and "fatty" components (from 6, 8, 9, and 10-carbon aldehydes), as well as a slight popcorn note and floral, corn-like, hay-like, and animal qualities. Brown rices contain these and also small amounts of vanillin and maple-sugar-like sotolon. Aromatic rices are especially rich in the popcorn-like aromatic component (acetylpyrroline), which is also an important element in screwpine leaves (p. 411), and cooked popcorn and bread crust. Because it is volatile and not regenerated during cooking, the popcorn aromatic escapes during cooking, and its concentration declines. This is one reason for pre-soaking aromatic rices; this step shortens the cooking and minimizes aroma loss.

Cooking with Rice

Many Traditional Methods The cooking of rice is a matter of introducing moisture throughout the grains and heating them enough to gelate and soften the starch granules. Indian cooks boil the rice in an excess of water that's poured off when the rice is done, so the grains end up intact and separate. Chinese and Japanese cooks boil rice with just enough water to moisten and cook it through in a closed pot, which produces a mass of grains that cling together and are easily eaten with chopsticks. Where rice has always been an everyday staff of life, through much of East Asia, it's usually prepared simply in water, and judged by the intactness of its grains and their whiteness, gloss, tenderness, and flavor. Where rice was more unusual and even a luxury, in central Asia, the Middle East, and the Mediterranean, it's often enriched with broths, oils, butter, and other ingredients to make such dishes as pilafs, risottos, and paellas. Iranians, perhaps the most sophisticated rice cooks, make polo by partly boiling long-grain rice in excess water, layering it with a variety of cooked meats, vegetables, dried fruits, and nuts, then gently steaming to finish the cooking, and managing the heat so that a brown crust of rice, the prized tahdig, forms at the bottom.

Rinsing and Soaking An initial rinsing of the dry rice removes surface starch and thus a source of added stickiness. Some rices, notably basmatis and Japanese varieties, are either soaked in water or allowed to rest for 20-30 minutes after washing; they thus absorb some water, which will speed the subsequent cooking. Brown and wild rices can be treated similarly.

After Cooking: Resting, Reheating Once cooked, rice benefits from a resting period to allow the grains to cool down somewhat and become firmer, so that they aren't as easily broken when scooped from the pot and served. Leftover rice is often hard due to the retrogradation of the starch, which is cured by heating it up to the gelation temperature again. Rice is easily softened by reheating to 160ºF/70ºC or above, either with a little added water in a pot or in the microwave oven, or fried to make fried rice, rice cakes, or croquettes.

Keeping Rice Safe Cooked rice turns out to be a potential source of food poisoning. Raw rice almost always carries dormant spores of the bacterium Bacillus cereus, which produces powerful gastrointestinal toxins. The spores can tolerate high temperatures, and some survive cooking. If cooked rice is left for a few hours at room temperature, the spores germinate, bacteria multiply, and toxins accumulate. Ordinary cooked rice should therefore be served promptly, and leftovers refrigerated to prevent bacterial growth. The rice in Japanese sushi is served at room temperature, but the surface of its cooked grains are coated with a flavorful and antimicrobial mixture of rice vinegar and sugar. Rice salads should be similarly acidified with vinegar, lemon or lime juice.

Some Other Rice Preparations and Products Cultures across the world have found many different inventive uses for rice. Here is a brief sampling.

Rice Flour Rice flour is notable for being around 90% starch, and for having the smallest starch granules of the major cereals, a half to a quarter the size of wheat starch granules. When used to thicken sauces or fillings, it provides an especially fine texture. And thanks to its low protein content, the dry flour absorbs relatively little water. This means that when it's used to make a frying batter for Japanese tempura, rice flour gives a thin consistency with relatively little water, and so the batter readily fries to a crisp, dry texture.

Because rice flour contains no elastic gluten proteins, it can't be used to make raised breads. But the same lack of gluten makes rice flour a useful ingredient for people with gluten intolerance. Bakers make a reasonable approximation of raised bread by supplementing rice flour with xanthan or guar gum or other long-chain carbohydrates, which help bind the dough together and retain the gas bubbles produced by yeasts or chemical leavenings.

Risotto: Turning Rice into Its Own Sauce

The risotto of Italy is made with medium-grain varieties that are fairly large and can tolerate the unique cooking method, which abrades and removes starch from the rice surface so that it can thicken the cooking liquid to a creamy consistency.

To make risotto, the rice is cooked through by adding a small amount of hot cooking liquid at a time and stirring the rice until the liquid is absorbed, then repeating until the rice is soft but still has a kernel of chewiness at the center. This time-consuming technique subjects the rice grains to constant friction, and rubs softened endosperm from the surface so that it can become dissolved in the liquid phase (stirring only at the end of cooking breaks the softened grains apart rather than removing the surface layer). In addition, the cooking of small amounts of liquid in an open pan causes much of the moisture to evaporate, which means that more of the cooking liquid must be used, and thus that more of the cooking liquid's flavor becomes concentrated in the dish.

Restaurant cooks prepare risotto to order by cooking the rice well ahead of time the traditional way until it's just short of done, then refrigerating it. This allows some of the cooked starch in the rice to firm (p. 458), giving the grain more resilience than it would have if cooked fully and simply rewarmed. Then just before serving, the chilled rice is reheated and finished with hot broth and enrichments.

Rice Powder Rice powder is a condiment made in Vietnam and Thailand by roasting the grains, then grinding them; it's sprinkled on a variety of dishes just before eating.

Rice Noodles and Rice Paper Despite rice's lack of gluten, noodles and thin sheets can be made from rice-flour doughs (p. 579). Rice paper is used as a wrapper to enclose meat and vegetable preparations, and can be eaten either simply moistened or fried.

Mochi Mochi is the Japanese name for a chewy, almost elastic preparation of sticky rice that may be formed into balls or into thin sheets for wrapping around a filling of some kind. It's made by steaming sticky rice, then pounding it to a paste, or by making a dough from sticky rice flour and kneading it for 30 minutes. The pounding or kneading organizes the bushy amylopectin starch molecules into an intermeshed mass that resists changes in its structure.

Lao Chao Lao chao is a Chinese fermented rice made from sticky rice. The rice is steamed, cooled, made into small cakes with a starter that includes the mold Aspergillus oryzae (p. 755) and yeasts, and held at room temperature for two to three days until it becomes soft, sweet, and tart, with a fruity and alcoholic aroma.

Wild Rice Wild rice is not a species of the true tropical rice genus Oryza. It's a distant relative, a cool-climate water grass that produces unusually long grains, to three-quarters of an inch (2 cm), with a dark seedcoat and a complex, distinctive flavor. Zizania palustris is a native of the upper midwestern Great Lakes region of North America, where it grows in shallow lakes and marshes and was gathered in canoes by the Ojibway and other native peoples. It's the only cereal from North America to have become important as a human food. Wild rice is unusual among the cereals for containing double the usual amount of moisture at maturity, around 40% of the kernel weight. It thus requires more elaborate processing than true rice in order to be stored. It's first matured in moist piles for a week or two, during which immature grains continue to ripen and microbes grow on the grain surfaces, generating flavor and weakening the husks. Then it is parched over a fire to dry the grain, flavor it, and make the husk brittle; and finally it's threshed to remove the husk.

Texture and Flavor Wild rice has a firm, chewy texture thanks to its intact bran layer and the parching process, which gelates and then anneals the starch much as parboiling does for true rice. It takes longer to cook than most grains, sometimes an hour or more, because its starch has been precooked into a hard, glassy mass, and because its bran layers are impregnated with cutins and waxes (p. 262) to resist the absorption of water (in nature, the grains fall into the water and lie dormant for months or even years before germinating). The dark pigmentation may also contribute; it is partly green-black chlorophyll derivatives and partly black phenolic complexes generated by browning enzymes. Producers often slightly abrade the grains to improve their water absorption and shorten cooking time. Cooks can also pre-soak the grains for hours in warm water.

The flavor of the raw grain has earthy and green, flowery, tea-like notes. Curing amplifies the tea notes (from pyridines) but may add an undesirable mustiness; parching generates browning reactions and a toasted, nutty character (from pyrazines). Different producers use different methods for curing (none, brief, extended) and parching (low or high temperatures, open fires or indirectly heated metal drums), so the flavor of wild rice varies greatly.

Domesticated Wild Rice Relatively little wild rice is still gathered from uncultivated, naturally occurring stands. Today most is grown in artificially flooded paddies, and harvested mechanically after the fields are drained. Cultivated wild rice therefore has more consistently mature, dark seedcoats than the gathered grain. To taste truly wild rice from its native region and savor the differences among small producers, it's necessary to read labels carefully.
