---
book: "On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen"
book_slug: "mcgee-on-food-and-cooking"
author: "Harold McGee"
lang: "en"
relevance: "high"
chapter: "Chapter 11: Sauces"
heading: "Meat Stocks and Sauces"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 11: Sauces", "Meat Stocks and Sauces"]
order: 467
source_page: null
tokens_est: 2660
---

# Meat Stocks and Sauces

Meat Stocks and Sauces

There are several general strategies for making meat and fish sauces. The simplest of them center on the juices produced when the meat for the final dish is cooked, which can be flavored and/or thickened at the last minute with purees, emulsions, or a starch-based mixture. In the more versatile system developed by French cooks, one begins by making a water extract of meat and bones ahead of time, and then uses that stock to cook the final dish, or concentrates it to make intensely flavored, full-bodied sauces. These stocks and concentrates used to be the heart of restaurant cooking. They're less important now, but still represent the state of the art in meat sauces.

Collagen and gelatin. Collagen molecules (left) contribute mechanical strength to connective tissue and bone in animal muscles. They are made up of three individual protein chains wound closely together into a helix to make a rope-like fiber. When heated in water, the individual protein chains come apart (right) and dissolve into the water. The unwound, separate chains are what we call gelatin.

The Choice of Ingredients The aim in making meat stock is to produce a full-flavored liquid with enough gelatin that it will also become full-bodied when reduced. Meat is an expensive ingredient, an excellent source of flavor, and a modest source of gelatin. Bones and skins are less expensive, poor sources of flavor, but excellent sources of gelatin. So the most flavorful and expensive stocks are made with meat, the fullest bodied and cheapest with bones and pork skin, and everyday stocks with some of each. Beef and chicken stocks taste distinctly of their respective meats, while veal bones and meat are valued for their more neutral character, as well as their higher yield of soluble gelatin. Cartilaginous veal knuckles and feet give especially large amounts. Typically, the meat and bones are cooked in between one and two times their weight in water (1-2 quarts or liters per 2 lb/1 kg solids), and yield about half their weight in stock, thanks to gradual evaporation during cooking. The smaller the pieces into which they're cut, the more quickly their contents can be extracted in the water.

In order to round out the flavor of a stock, cooks usually cook the meat and bones along with aromatic vegetables - celery, carrots, onions - a packet of herbs, and sometimes wine. Carrots and onions contribute sweetness as well as aroma, wine tartness and savoriness. Salt is never added at this stage, because the meats and vegetables release some, and it becomes concentrated as the stock reduces.

Cooking the Stock A classic meat stock should be as clear as possible, so that it can be made into soup broths and aspics that will be attractive to the eye. Many of the details of stock making have to do with removing impurities, especially the soluble cell proteins that coagulate into unsightly gray particles.

The bones and often meat as well (and skin, if any) are first washed thoroughly. To make a light stock, they are then put in a pot of cold water that is brought to the boil; they're then removed from the pot and rinsed. This blanching step removes surface impurities and coagulates surface proteins on the bones and meat so that they won't cloud the cooking liquid. To make a dark stock for brown sauces, the bones and meat are first roasted in a hot oven to produce color and a more intense roasted-meat flavor with the Maillard reactions between proteins and carbohydrates. This process also coagulates the surface proteins and makes blanching unnecessary.

The Importance of a Cold Start and Uncovered, Slow Heating After the blanching or browning, the meat solids are started in an uncovered pot of cold water, which the cook brings slowly to a gentle simmer and keeps there, regularly skimming off the fat and scum that accumulate at the surface. The cold start and slow heating allow the soluble proteins to escape the solids and coagulate slowly, forming large aggregates that either rise to the surface and are easily skimmed off, or settle onto the sides and bottom. A hot start produces many separate and tiny protein particles that remain suspended and cloud the stock; and a boil churns particles and fat droplets into a cloudy suspension and emulsion. The pot is left uncovered for several reasons. Because this allows water to evaporate and cool the surface, it makes it less likely that the stock will boil. It also dehydrates the surface scum, which becomes more insoluble and easier to skim. And it starts the process of concentration that will give the stock a more intense flavor.

Food Words: Stock, Broth

The word stock as it's applied in the kitchen reflects the professional cook's approach to sauce making. It derives from an old Germanic root meaning "tree trunk," and has more than 60 related meanings revolving around the idea of basic materials, sources, and supplies. It's thus the culinary application of a very general term, and was first used in the 18th century. Much more specific and ancient is broth, which goes back to 1000 CE and a Germanic root bru meaning "to prepare by boiling" and the material so prepared, both it and the boiling liquid. Bouillon and brew are related terms.

Single and Double Stocks After the scum has mostly stopped forming, the vegetables, herbs, and wine are added and the cooking is continued at a gentle simmer until most of the flavor and gelatin have been extracted from the solids. The liquid is strained through cheesecloth or a metal strainer without pressing on the solids, which would extract cloudy particles. It's then thoroughly chilled, and the solidified fat removed from the surface. (If the cook doesn't have the time to chill the stock, he can soak away much of the fat from the surface with cloth or paper towels or specially designed plastic blotters.) The stock is now ready to use as an ingredient, to make braised and stewed meats and meat soups, or as a savory cooking liquid for vegetables; or it may be reduced for use in a sauce. The cook may also use stock to extract a new batch of meat and bones and produce the especially flavorful, highly prized - and expensive - double stock. (Double stock can in turn be combined with more fresh meat and bones to make a triple stock.)

Because a standard kitchen extraction of eight hours releases only about 20% of the gelatin in beef bones, the bones may be extracted for a second time, for a total of up to 24 hours. The resulting liquid can then be used to start the next fresh extraction of meat and bones.

Concentrating Meat Stocks: Glace and Demi-glace Slowly simmered until it's reduced to a tenth its original volume, stock becomes glace de viande, literally "meat ice" or "meat glass," which cools to a stiff, clear jelly. Glace has a thick, syrupy, sticky consistency thanks to its high gelatin content, about 25%, an intensely savory taste thanks to the concentrated amino acids, and a rounded, mellow, but somewhat flat aroma thanks to the long hours during which volatile molecules have been boiled off or reacted with each other. Meat glace is used in small quantities to lend flavor and body to sauces. Intermediate between stock and glace is demi-glace or "half- glace, " which is stock simmered down to 25-40% of its original volume, often with some tomato puree or paste to add flavor and color, and with some flour or starch to supplement its lower gelatin content (10-15%). The tomato particles and flour gluten proteins cloud the stock and are removed by skimming the stock as it reduces, and then by a final straining. The starch in demi-glace, around 3-5% of its final weight, is largely an economy measure - it gives a greater thickness with less stock reduction and loss of volume to evaporation - but it also has the advantage of sparing some of the stock's flavor from being boiled off, and avoiding the sticky consistency of very concentrated gelatin.

Demi-glace is the base for many classic French brown sauces, which are given particular flavors and nuances with the addition of various other ingredients (meats, vegetables, herbs, wine) and final enriching thickeners (butter, cream). Because they're versatile but tedious to prepare, demi-glace and glace are manufactured and widely available in frozen form.

Concentrating Stock and Flavor to Finish a Dish

An alternative to cooking stock down in bulk is to reduce it in small quantities to augment the pan juices of a roast or sauté. Once the meat is cooked and its juices concentrated and browned on the pan bottom, the cook can repeatedly add a small quantity of stock to the pan and cook it down until its solids begin to brown, then dissolve the successive brownings in a final dose of stock to make the liquid sauce. The high pan temperature helps break down the gelatin molecules into shorter lengths, so the resulting sauce is less sticky and congeals more slowly than it would if the gelatin were intact.

Consommé and Clarification with Egg Whites One of the most remarkable soups is consommé, an intensely flavored, amber-colored, clear liquid with a distinct but delicate body. (The name comes from the French for "to consume," "to use up," and referred to the medieval practice of cooking the meat broth down until it reached the right consistency.) It is made by preparing a basic stock mainly from meat, not flavor-poor bones or skin, and then clarifying it while simultaneously extracting a second batch of meat and vegetables. It's a kind of double stock made expressly for soup; as much as a pound/0.5 kg of meat may go into producing one serving.

The clarification of consommé is accomplished by stirring finely chopped meat and vegetables into the cold stock along with several lightly whisked egg whites. The mixture is then brought slowly to the simmer, and kept there for around an hour. As the stock heats up, the abundant egg white proteins begin to coagulate into a fine cheesecloth-like network, and essentially strain the liquid from within. Soluble proteins from the fresh batch of meat help produce large protein particles that are easily trapped by the egg-white network. Gradually the protein mesh rises to the top of the pot to form a "raft," which continues to collect particles brought to the surface by convection in the liquid. When the cooking is done, the raft is skimmed off and any remaining particles are removed by a final straining. The resulting liquid is very clear. Clarification with egg whites does remove both flavor molecules and some gelatin from the stock, which is why the cook supplies fresh meat and vegetables during the clarification.
