---
book: "On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen"
book_slug: "mcgee-on-food-and-cooking"
author: "Harold McGee"
lang: "en"
relevance: "high"
chapter: "Chapter 11: Sauces"
heading: "The Nature of Starch"
breadcrumb: ["Chapter 11: Sauces", "The Nature of Starch"]
order: 477
source_page: null
tokens_est: 2152
---

# The Nature of Starch

The Nature of Starch

Starch molecules are long chains of thousands of glucose sugar molecules linked up together. There are two kinds of starch molecules: long straight chains called amylose, and short, branched, bushy chains called amylopectin. Plants deposit starch molecules in microscopic solid granules. The size, shape, amylose and amylopectin contents, and cooking qualities of the starch granules vary from species to species.

Linear Amylose and Bushy Amylopectin The shapes of amylose and amylopectin molecules have a direct effect on their ability to thicken a sauce. The straight amylose chains coil up into long helical structures when dissolved in water, but they retain their basically linear shape. Their elongation makes it very likely that one chain will knock into another or into a granule: each sweeps through a relatively large volume of liquid. By contrast, the branched shape of amylopectin makes for a compact target and therefore a molecule less likely to collide with others; and even if it does collide, it's less likely to get tangled up and slow the motion of other molecules and granules in the vicinity. A small number of very long amylose molecules, then, will do the job of more but shorter amylose molecules, and of many more bushy amylopectins. For this reason, the cook can obtain the same degree of thickening from a smaller amount of long-amylose potato starch than from moderate-amylose wheat and corn starches.

Two kinds of starch. Starch molecules are chains made up of hundreds or thousands of glucose molecules bonded together. They take two forms: straight chains of amylose (left), and branched chains of amylopectin (right). A long amylose chain moves around in a larger volume than the more compact amylopectin containing the same number of glucose molecules, and is more likely to tangle with other chains. Amylose is therefore a more effective thickener than amylopectin.

Pure Starch

Starch has been separated from the proteins and other materials in grains since ancient times. The Romans called it amylum, which meant "not ground at the mill." They made it by grinding wheat in a mortar and then soaking the flour for days, during which bacteria grew and digested the grain's cell walls and gluten proteins while leaving the dense, solid starch grains intact. They reground the dregs, and then pressed them through fine linen, which retained the small grains. The starch grains were dried in the sun, and then either cooked in milk or used to thicken sauces (p. 583).

Swelling and Gelation What makes starch so useful is its behavior in hot water. Mix some flour or cornstarch into cold water, and nothing much happens. The starch granules slowly absorb a limited amount of water, about 30% of their own weight, and they simply sink to the bottom of the pot and sit there. But when the water gets hot enough, the energy of its molecules is sufficient to disrupt the weaker regions of the granule. The granules then absorb more water and swell up, thereby putting greater and greater stress on the more organized, stronger granule regions. Within a certain range of temperatures characteristic of each starch source but usually beginning around 120-140ºF/50-60ºC, the granules suddenly lose their organized structure, absorb a great deal of water, and become amorphous networks of starch and water intermingled. This temperature is called the gelation range, because the granules become individual gels, or water-containing meshworks of long molecules. This range can be recognized by the fact that the initially cloudy suspension of granules suddenly becomes more translucent. The individual starch molecules become less closely packed together and don't deflect as many light rays, and so the mixture becomes clearer.

Thickening: The Granules Leak Starch Depending on how concentrated the starch granules are to begin with, the starch-water mixture may noticeably thicken at various points during their swelling and gelation. Most sauces are rather dilute (less than 5% starch by weight) and thicken during gelation, when the mixture begins to become translucent. They reach their greatest thickness after the gelated granules begin to leak amylose and amylopectin molecules into the surrounding liquid. The long amylose molecules form something like a three-dimensional fishnet that not only entraps pockets of water, but blocks the movements of the whale-like, water-swollen starch granules.

Thinning: The Granules Break Once it reaches its thickest consistency, the starch-water mixture will slowly thin out again. There are three different things that the cook may do that encourage thinning: heating for a long period of time after thickening occurs, heating all the way to the boil, and vigorous stirring. All of these have the same effect: they shatter the swollen and fragile granules into very small fragments. While this does mean that even more amylose is released into the water, it also means that there are many fewer large bodies to get caught in the amylose tangle. In other words, the amount of netting increases, the mesh grows finer, but at the same time the big whales become small minnows. This thinning effect is especially striking in the case of very thick pastes, less obvious in normal sauces. If the granules are few and far between to begin with, their disintegration is less noticeable. This thinning is accompanied by a greater refinement of texture, as the starch particles disappear and only indetectably small molecules remain.

Some of the thinning of long-simmered starch-based sauces is caused by the gradual breakdown of the starch molecules themselves into smaller fragments. Acidity accelerates this breakdown.

Thickening a sauce with starch. Uncooked starch granules offer little obstruction to the flow of the surrounding liquid (left). As the sauce heats up and the temperature reaches the gelation range, the granules absorb water and swell, and the sauce consistency begins to thicken (center). As cooking continues and the temperature approaches the boil, the granules swell even more and leak starch chains into the liquid (right). It's at this stage that the sauce reaches its maximum thickness.

Cooling, Further Thickening, and Congealing Once the starch in a sauce has gelated, its amylose has leaked out, and the cook judges the sauce to be properly cooked, he stops the cooking, and the temperature of the sauce begins to fall. As the mixture cools down, the water and starch molecules move with less and less energy, and at a certain point the force of the temporary bonds among them begins to hold the molecules together longer than they are kept apart by random collisions. Gradually, the longer amylose molecules form stable bonds among themselves, the kind of bonds that held them together in the granule initially. Water molecules settle in the pockets between starch chains. As a result, the liquid mixture gets progressively thicker. If the amylose molecules are concentrated enough, and the temperature falls far enough, the liquid mixture congeals into a solid gel, just as a gelatin solution settles into a jelly. (Bushy amylopectin molecules take much longer to bond to each other, so low-amylose starches are slow to congeal.) This is the way in which pie fillings, puddings, and similar solid but moist starch concoctions are made.

Judge Sauce Consistency at Serving Temperatures It's important for the cook to anticipate this cooling and thickening. We create and evaluate most sauces on the stove at high temperatures, around 200ºF/93ºC, but when they're poured in a thin layer onto food and served, they immediately begin to cool and thicken. However thick a sauce is in the pan, it's going to be thicker when the diner actually tastes it, and it may even congeal on the plate. So sauces should be thinner at the stove than they're meant to be at the table. (Minimizing the amount of thickener will also reduce the extent to which the sauce's flavor is muted.) The best way to predict the final texture of a sauce is to pour a spoonful into a cool dish and then sample it.

Starch in sauce making. A swollen granule of potato starch caught in a meshwork of molecules freed from it and other granules (left). A starch-thickened sauce is thickest at this stage, when both starch granules and molecules block the movement of water. A granule of wheat starch that has lost nearly all of its starch molecules to the surrounding liquid (right). As the granules in a starch-thickened sauce disintegrate, they no longer get caught in the mesh of free starch, and the sauce thins out.
